Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care
Financing System in California
Delivered to Members of the Healthy California for All Commission:
Jessica Altman, MPP
Michelle Baass, MPPA
Jennie Chin Hansen, RN (inactive)
Carmen Comsti, JD
Caroline (Cara) Dessert, JD
Sara Flocks, MPA
Antonia Hernández, JD
Sandra R. Hernández, MD
William C. Hsiao, PhD
Rupa Marya, MD
Donald B. Moulds, PhD
Senator Richard Pan, MD, MPH
Robert K. Ross, MD
Richard M. Scheffler, PhD
Andy Schneider, JD
Anthony E. Wright
Assembly Member Jim Wood, DDS
Final Report: April 2022
1Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Authorship and Review Process
This report was developed under the guidance of the California Health and Human Services
Agency. Secretary Mark Ghaly reviewed and edited multiple drafts and provided overall
direction on this report's structure and content. Vishaal Pegany of the California Health and
Human Services Agency provided oversight and editorial review and drafted portions of the
report. Support for the Healthy California for All Commission process and assistance in
drafting and revising the final report was provided by a consulting team contracted through
the University of California, San Francisco (Joanne Spetz, Ph.D., principal investigator from
November, 2020 to the present; Andrew Bindman, M.D., principal investigator from project
inception through October 2020). Members of the consulting team included Marian Mulkey,
Richard Kronick, Laurel Lucia, Ken Jacobs, Bobbie Wunsch, Eric Douglas and Karin
Bloomer. Jerry Kominski, Srikanth Kadiyala, and Tynan Challenor contributed to the analytic
findings. Joslyn Maula provided design and formatting assistance.
Members of the Healthy California for All Commission received a draft version for feedback
and consideration on March 17, 2022, and the draft was available for public review
beginning on March 18, 2022. Commissioner feedback on the draft was provided via
survey; Commissioners' responses and comments on the draft are summarized here. The
final report, will be provided to commissioners a week before the Commission's last meeting
on April 25, 2022. Following the Commission's consideration, the final report will be
delivered to Governor Newsom and to the Legislature. Commissioner comment letters on
the final report received by May 6, 2022 will be included in Appendix E. The final report will
be posted to the Healthy California for All web page with guidance on how public comments
may be offered. Public comments on the final report that meet basic guidelines regarding
accessibility and length will be posted as part of the public record.
2Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Table of Contents
Opening Letter from Secretary Ghaly..
Introduction and Overview.
Executive Summary ..
Rationale for and Benefits of Unified Financing..........
9
Key Design Decisions Required for UF
10
Next Steps Underway and Planned.........
11
Composition and Focus of Commission..........
. 13
Timeline and Process.
15
Prior Work on the Shortcomings of the Current Fragmented Financing System.............. 17
Report Structure...
19
Goals and Values
19
20
21
22
22
23
24
24
25
25
26
Estimated Changes in Health Spending in Year 1..................
28
Health Spending Over Time.......
31
Revenue Sources for Year 1 of Unified Financing
33
Stability Over Time .......
40
Estimated Effects of Unified Financing on Equity, Health, and Other Outcomes.......... 42
Analytic Findings: Summary of Potential Benefits ..........
Decisions and Actions Needed to Achieve Unified Financing
44
45
46
46
47
48
…………………….
Community Engagement..
Community Engagement Approach .....
Findings Related to A Single Statewide Health Care Program.
Cost and Affordability
Access to Care .......
Cultural Humility and Respect
Consumer Engagement in Care and System Design.
Analytic Approach and Findings .....
Analytic Approach......
Analytic Findings.......
Design.............
Eligibility and Enrollment
Covered Benefits and Services
Patient Cost-Sharing ..
3
5
7
9Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Provider Payment.........
Purchasing Arrangements and Role, if any, for Intermediaries..
Care Coordination
Greater Efficiency and Cost Containment.
Care Delivery and Workforce .....
Financing ......
Obtaining Federal Government Permissions and Funding.....
State Requirements Related to Raising and Using Funds for UF.
Governance
59
61
63
Systems and Infrastructure
65
Health Data Exchange
65
Unique Patient Identifier
66
Data on Race, Ethnicity and Language and Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity .. 66
Claims and Encounter Data...….......
66
67
73
73
75
76
78
84
86
92
94
Steps on the Path to Unified Financing under State Authority..
Priority Actions and Next Steps ......
The "North Star:" Unified Financing.
Clearing a Threshold Issue: Federal Permissions and Federal Funding.…...
Commissioner Perspectives on Priority Actions….......
Moving Forward ....
49
52
56
57
58
59
Conclusion..........
Appendix A: Commissioner Survey "Goals and Propositions".
Appendix B: Why Do Estimates of California Health Expenditures Vary? ....
Appendix C: Legal Memo on Unified Financing of State Health Coverage......
Appendix D: Employment Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) Considerations for
Unified Financing.…....
Appendix E: Commissioner Comment Letters (forthcoming)...
103
106CalHHS
California Health & Human Services Agency
Opening Letter from Secretary Ghaly
April 18, 2022
Members of the Healthy California for All Commission:
When Governor Newsom and I sat down during the early days of his first year as Governor
to discuss my serving as his Secretary for Health and Human Services, our conversation
focused on two questions: (1) how do we better address the growing behavioral health
needs of Californians? and (2) how do we move toward implementing a single-payer
health system?
Little did we know that we would soon be facing a global pandemic that would require an
immense amount of our collective time and attention. Yet in the midst of the danger and
pain of the pandemic, COVID-19 has also opened up a renewed and necessary focus on
race- and poverty-based inequalities and the desperate need for lasting change in how
we seek to address them. At California's Health and Human Services Agency (CalHHS), we
call the pandemic the great unmasker of inequities and the great accelerant for change.
The pandemic's disproportionate impact on communities that have historically
experienced worse health outcomes has been tragic but not surprising. Throughout the
pandemic, COVID-19 death rates have been nearly twice as high among racial and ethnic
minorities and have been concentrated in low-income communities. Beyond COVID-19's
direct impact, delays and disruptions in care related to the pandemic have led to excess
morbidity and mortality from smoldering, under-addressed illnesses in these same
communities. We face an urgent need to undo longstanding social and structural inequities
- in health and beyond - that led communities across our state to experience
disproportionate incidence and adverse health outcomes from a ruthless virus.
It is, therefore, not surprising that the following report seeks to lean in and push the envelope
toward genuine health care system transformation. The Commission engaged in rich, frank
and occasionally tense discussions that resulted in a set of widely agreed on position
statements. Many initiatives to accelerate our travels down the road to health care system
transformation are proposed or already underway. Nevertheless, there are key areas where
additional work is required.
I am proud to be part of an administration that has committed to investments and radical
changes that will improve the health of all Californians. These include advancing the
"Health for All" Medi-Cal expansion in the Governor's proposed budget; raising the bar for
both health plan performance and system innovation in the recently released Medi-Cal
health plan procurement; the transformation to move upstream to address social
determinants of health at the core of CalAIM; the proposed Office of Health Care
1215 O STREET MS-8 SACRAMENTO, CA 95814
916.654.3454 WWW.CHHS.CA.GOV
.Affordability; and the work to establish a data sharing framework through which we can
have timely access to data required to address both health and social needs.
Each of these efforts is an improvement in and of itself but also moves California closer to
the ultimate goal of total health system transformation. Access, quality, equity and
affordability are all part of what our Commission considered foundational within the unified
financing health care system we envision. To be clear, transformed financing is not an end
in itself; rather it is a tool to drive the change we want to see. As Governor Newsom says
each budget presentation, “a budget is a statement of our values." In the same way, the
approach to financing health care - both collecting the funds and paying them out - is a
statement of not just what we value, but who we value. A system of unified financing is
uniquely positioned to transform care delivery and to shift the power that lies in health and
health care to benefit those who have too often been overlooked.
Health reform of the magnitude we seek is not for the faint of heart. Indeed, the
Commission's strong heart was regularly on display over these past two and a half years.
We can and will build a health system that serves those in need well. We can do this
together. This is how we build a Healthy California for All.
As a Midwest-born, first generation American with parents who did not know how to
engage in a land they did not know, I benefited from government-sponsored health care
services. We looked to the nearby Indian Health Services clinic for all our health care -
urgent care, primary care, and dental care. Lines were long but care was thoughtful and
available. This steady dependence on high-quality free or low-cost care are among my
earliest memories. Despite the years that have passed, I clearly remember not just where I
received care, but what it cost and how I was treated.
So, with this context in mind and with a deep sense of humility and hope, we release this
report of the Healthy California for All Commission. The report documents the particular
benefits and unique potential that a unified financing system holds for California. The report
details a specific action plan for California to pursue, which includes engaging with federal
partners to clear the threshold issue of securing adequate and sustainable funding from
federal programs, refining the ultimate design of a unified financing system, and preparing
to act decisively as policy and political windows of opportunity open.
In closing, I want to thank my co-Commissioners for their grace throughout the process. We
juggled a diversity of viewpoints. We engaged in meaningful conversation and gave space
for comments that were wide-ranging. We learned and grew together in a way that makes
us proud. California Proud!
Arms linked,
Mark thaly
Mark Ghaly
1215 O STREET MS-8 SACRAMENTO, CA 95814
916.654.3454 WWW.CHHS.CA.GOV
.Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Introduction and Overview
Established by Senate Bill (SB) 104 (Chapter 67, Statutes of 2019), the Healthy California
for All Commission is charged with developing a plan that includes options for advancing
progress toward a health care delivery system in California that provides coverage and
access through a unified financing system, including, but not limited to, a single-payer
financing system, for all Californians. This report, the final deliverable required of the
Commission under SB 104, Chapter 67, Statutes of 2019, offers options for key design
considerations for a unified financing system, including, but not limited to, a single-payer
financing system. The report elevates a shared vision of a Healthy California for All that will
ensure health care that is accessible, affordable, equitable, high-quality and universal and
outlines the decisions and actions that will move California toward a unified financing
system for health care.
The report draws extensively on discussions held by the Commission from January 2020
through February 2022. The report incorporates commissioner input, obtained via three
surveys administered in September, November and December, 2021. Survey questions and
statements were informed by commissioner comments during Commission meetings on the
goals, values and key propositions that should guide Commission work.1 In addition to those
topics, the December survey sought input on priorities for the transition to unified financing.
The report also draws on insights from analytic work conducted in connection with the
Healthy California for All Commission and offers insights from community engagement
research conducted in parallel with the Commission process. An earlier version of this report
was shared with Commissioners and posted for public review on March 17, 2022; this
version has been revised and improved as a result of comments received by many
commissioners at that time.
As used in this report, the concept of unified financing describes a statewide system to
arrange, pay for, and assure health care in which:
All Californians will be entitled to receive a standard package of health care services;
Entitlement will not vary by age, employment status, disability status, income,
immigration status, or other characteristics; and
●
Distinctions among Medicare, Medi-Cal, employer-sponsored insurance, and
individual market coverage will be eliminated within the system of unified financing.
As international examples make clear, there are many methods to achieve unified financing.
For example, Canada uses a decentralized approach administered by the country's
provinces to pay private hospitals and physicians for medically necessary services without
1 Complete survey findings are available at the Healthy California for All webpage. See "Meeting Information"
documents for September 28, 2021 survey synthesis; November 17, 2021 survey report, and February 23,
2022 for the December 2021 survey report. Commissioner feedback obtained via survey on the March 17
report draft are available in this Survey Report.
7Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
cost-sharing at the point of use. In the United Kingdom, all residents are entitled to health
care through the government-administered National Health Service, which owns hospitals
and other providers such as ambulance, mental health and district nursing services, and
pays salaries to physician specialists and capitated rates to primary care physicians.
Germany requires mandatory purchase of statutorily-defined health insurance administered
by highly regulated nongovernmental sickness funds. The Netherlands provides a
mandatory, universal social health insurance program that relies on non-profit health
insurers paid via a risk-based capitation formula.² Although international systems of unified
financing rely on a variety of payment arrangements and structures, they share two
characteristics: they are universal, and they provide the same benefits and access to
services regardless of employment status and income.
The Commission's charge - to explore "options for key design considerations for a unified
financing system, including, but not limited to, a single-payer system" - left room for
discussion and debate about how unified financing or a single-payer system would work in
California. Those discussions are the subject of the remainder of this report.
2 More detail on international systems is available at https://www.commonwealthfund.org/international-health-
policy-center/countries
8Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Executive Summary
On behalf of the Healthy California for All Commission, this report provides:
An endorsement of and the rationale for a system of unified financing that is
accessible, affordable, equitable, high-quality and universal;
A description of key decision points required to craft such a system for California; and
Observations about next steps underway and planned that would move California
toward the envisioned unified financing system.
Rationale for and Benefits of Unified Financing
In California today, many different health insurance arrangements (employer-sponsored
insurance, public coverage programs, and individually-purchased health insurance) impose
different eligibility rules, cover different benefits, and establish different networks and
payment arrangements with hospitals, doctors and other health care providers. Fragmented
financing hampers accountability for quality, access, and equity and can encourage plans
and providers to avoid patients with costly and complex health care needs. There is no
central accountability for spending and ample opportunity for plans, providers and other
health care interests to seek financial rewards without improving health outcomes or offering
the services and supports that provide clinical benefits and/or that people value. Today's
fragmented financing system is very complex for patients and providers. It leads to gaps in
coverage and access when people's circumstances change. Complicated billing
requirements impose administrative burden, allow opportunities for fraud, and add cost.
The ills associated with fragmented health care financing do not affect all Californians
equally. People with low or variable income and people with complex and/or behavioral
health care needs are more likely to experience gaps in coverage and access and are more
likely to struggle to afford and obtain care even when they are covered. People in
communities that have been marginalized or excluded as a result of systemic racism or
other biases - people of color, immigrants, LGBTQ+ people, people who speak languages
other than English, and people with disabilities - report stigmatizing and disrespectful
treatment when they access care and often experience worse health outcomes.
Fragmented financing with no central locus of accountability make it all too easy for long-
standing inequities to persist.
A system of unified financing (UF), bringing all Californians into a single system without
distinctions based on employment, income, or other personal characteristics, creates new
opportunities and a greater imperative to moderate the rate of growth of health care
spending, make health care more affordable for individuals, improve health care outcomes,
and improve equity in access and outcomes. It would also yield the benefits of simplification
and reduced administrative burden for employers and health care providers.
9Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
A system of unified financing would also create significant opportunities to deliver health
care more effectively efficiently, and equitably. It could restructure incentives and payment
structures to encourage equity and high quality and could require greater transparency and
accountability than is possible under today's fragmented financing system. It would also
eliminate the complexity and administrative burden that detract from a focus on high quality
care that is safe, timely, effective, efficient, equitable and patient-centered.
A system of unified financing has the potential to fundamentally transform the lives of family
caregivers in California. Including LTSS as covered services would allow millions of low-
and middle-income Californians to choose care options that better meet their needs. Those
serving as unpaid family caregivers, disproportionately women of color, would have greater
opportunity to fulfill their own goals and dreams rather than sacrifice on behalf of their loved
ones.
Community engagement conducted in parallel with the Commission process found broad
support among Californians with low incomes for a single, statewide, government-run health
care program that covers all people who live in California. Californians with low incomes
would value three key attributes of a reimagined health care system: lower system cost and
greater consumer affordability; improved access to care; and greater cultural humility and
respect. Participants also expressed desire for engagement in system design and deeper
involvement in clinical care decisions.
The analysis done in connection with the Commission's work found that:
Absent a shift to UF, aggregate health care spending in California is estimated to
increase by $158 billion in 2022 dollars over nine years, representing an increase of
approximately 30% over baseline spending;
Under almost all scenarios analyzed, in the first year of implementation unified
financing is expected to result in lower total health care expenditures than under the
status quo;
• If, as expected, UF reduces the rate of growth of health spending, savings over time
would be achieved under all scenarios examined, even when long-term care
services and supports (LTSS) are included as covered services;
• Assuming that the federal and state governments support UF at the level they would
have supported under status quo fragmented financing, the savings from UF will
accrue to California employers and households, who will on average pay less to
support UF than they pay in the status quo;
Financing can be stable over time, but will depend on controlling cost growth and
securing agreements with the federal government about the rate of growth in federal
payments.
Key Design Decisions Required for UF
A move to UF would involve a complete overhaul of existing health care financing and
coverage arrangements. Design choices on an array of dimensions would be required to
effect this sweeping change. The Commission discussed many but not all of the
10Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
consequential decisions that lie on the path to UF, and began to explore the tradeoffs and
implications associated with different options. These decisions include:
Eligibility and enrollment
Covered benefits and services
Patient cost-sharing, if any
Provider payment
Purchasing arrangements and role, if any, for intermediaries
Care coordination
Greater efficiency and cost containment
Each of these topics involves considerable nuance; not all were explored with equal depth
by the Commission. In all cases, Commission conversations made progress toward
identifying the values that should guide California's future path and surfaced important
considerations that should guide future steps. The role of health plans or intermediaries
attracted particularly robust debate among Commissioners. There was broad agreement
that if health plans were retained, they should be reimagined with greater constraints on
corporate financial motivations. On the related topic of risk-based capitation, Commissioners
expressed divergent views. Some argued that capitation is essential in providing cost
discipline and efficient resource use and others argued that capitation encouraged health
care providers to stint on the delivery of potentially beneficial care, and to engage in socially
unproductive efforts to avoid serving patients most in need.
As California moves toward UF, determining how the system will be financed will be a
matter of great consequence. Obtaining federal government permissions and securing
adequate and sustainable federal funding for use within the state is a related threshold
issue. It will also be important to establish governance structures to support an accountable
and transparent system and implement a data exchange framework to enable timely and
secure access to electronic information in order to address health and social needs and
enable the effective and equitable delivery of services to improve health and wellbeing. A
uniform claims database under UF would also reduce fraud and abuse in claims billing.
Next Steps Underway and Planned
The Commission's charge was to “develop options for key design considerations for a
unified financing system, including, but not limited to, a single-payer financing system."
Going beyond that specific charge, this report's final section takes stock of several steps
underway that are aligned with the direction of an improved (accessible, affordable,
equitable, high-quality, universal) health care system and identifies additional steps that can
increase momentum toward UF.
The report's final section identifies illustrative tasks to advance unified financing. These
tasks are not necessarily prerequisites for UF and could be sequenced in a variety of ways.
Also included is a non-exhaustive set of concrete next steps - all of which would improve
11Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
access, affordability, equity and quality under status quo financing but whose impact would
be deepened under UF – including:
1. Workforce: Invest in and support a workforce that is diverse, that can meet the
cultural, socioeconomic, and linguistic diversity of California's residents and that is
responsive to consumer and patient needs.
2. Enact Office of Health Care Affordability: Establish health care cost targets and
address cost drivers in order to slow growth in health care spending.
3. Cost of Delivering Care: Leverage existing data and identify data gaps that have to
be overcome to understand the actual cost of delivering frequently performed
medical services (such as inpatient care, imaging, etc.).
4. Role of Health Plans: Evaluate whether health plans under the status quo add
value by furthering access, affordability, quality and equity while accounting for
excessive administrative costs and profits and burden on providers. If health plans
are retained and reimagined under UF, what functions would they perform?
5. Uniform Clinical Data Record: Once policies for data sharing are in place under
the forthcoming Data Exchange Framework, explore the potential benefits and
feasibility of developing a statewide uniform clinical record.
6. Administrative Costs: Further study of the administrative burden on providers
under the status quo and potential administrative cost savings under UF.
7. Fraud and Abuse: Upon implementation of the Health Care Payments Data
Program, identify and take action on claims fraud and overbilling.
In order to extend the impact of the Commission's work into the future and advance the
cause of UF, CalHHS proposes to dedicate staff to further refine UF design options, engage
with the federal government, and develop creative legal, policy and political solutions that
can engage and inspire Californians to embrace change. If the state is able to get traction
with the federal government on permissions and adequate and sustainable funding, CalHHS
dedicated staff will work with key constituencies that include health care providers, health
care systems, employers, labor unions, and consumers including Californians with low
incomes, Medicare beneficiaries, and people with employer-sponsored insurance to inform
the development of a fuller proposal on how UF will work. Developing and vetting a specific
proposal for UF will help to reassure Californians that the uncertainty associated with a
move to UF is outweighed by its benefits. While the state engages the federal government,
several actions, such as those described above, can happen in parallel to build the
foundation for a system of unified financing that is accessible, affordable, equitable, high-
quality and universal.
12Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Composition and Focus of Commission
The 18 members of the Healthy California for All Commission were appointed by the
Governor and the Legislature, pursuant to Section 1001 of the Health and Safety Code, to
advise and assist policy makers in making informed decisions about the future of
California's health care system with particular attention to illuminating the path to a system
of unified financing.
The Commission was charged with two deliverables: (1) an Environmental Analysis Report,
describing the current state of health care in California; and (2) a report to the Governor and
Legislature on how the state could move to a unified financing system, including but not
limited to a single payer approach, for health care.
The Commission's charter defined the Commission's role as advisory to the state. It had the
authority to take advisory votes and those votes were not binding on the state.
Thirteen members of the Commission were voting members; five members were non-voting,
ex officio members. At the initial meeting in January 2020, the Commission's members
were:
Name:
Mark Ghaly
Carmen Comsti
Jennie Chin
Hansen
Bill Hsiao
Rupa Marya
Sandra Hernandez California Health Care Foundation, CEO
Bob Ross
Richard Scheffler
Organization:
California Health and Human Services, Secretary Statute
Andy Schneider
California Nurses Association/National Nurses
United, Lead Regulatory Policy Specialist
AARP, past president; American Geriatrics
Society, past CEO
Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health,
Professor
UCSF School of Medicine, Associate Professor
The California Endowment, CEO
UC Berkeley School of Public Health, Professor
Georgetown University Center for Children and
Families, Research Professor of the Practice
13
Appointed by:
Governor
Governor
Governor
Governor
Governor
Governor
Governor
GovernorKey Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Name:
Sara Flocks
Janice Rocco³
Antonia
Hernandez
Anthony Wright
Peter Lee5
Don Moulds
Richard Pan
Jim Wood
Organization:
California Labor Federation, Policy Coordinator
(at Commission's inception)
Union Made, LLC, Partner (at present)
Richard Figueroa4 Acting Director
Department of Insurance, Deputy Commissioner
Health Policy & Reform
California Community Foundation, CEO
3 Served a partial term.
4 Served a partial term.
5 Served a partial term.
Health Access, Executive Director
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS),
Covered California, Executive Director
CalPERS, Chief Health Director
Senate Health Committee, Chair
Assembly Health Committee, Chair
Appointed by:
Senate
14
Senate
Assembly
Assembly
ex officio
ex officio
ex officio
ex officio
Mark Ghaly, MD, MPH, Secretary of California's Health and Human Services Agency,
served as the Commission's chair. Dr. Ghaly organized and convened the Commission's
meetings, established its operating principles and ground rules, and acted as a
spokesperson for the Commission. He also facilitated the majority of Commission meetings.
ex officio
The work of the Commission was supported by staff from the California Health and Human
Services agency and an outside consulting team. Under the direction of the Commission's
Chair, the staff and consultants worked together to develop agendas, speakers, and
materials for each meeting and gather input from Commissioners between meetings.
Consultants and staff also worked together to draft the reports of the Commission. The
consulting team also conducted independent analyses of different approaches to unified
financing for health care.Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
The Commission's meetings were open to the public and time was allotted at each meeting
for public comment, in accordance with the Bagley-Keene Act.6
Over its two-year existence, there were four changes in the Commission's composition:
Janice Rocco resigned and was replaced by Caroline Dessert, CEO of the San Diego
LGBT Community Center.
■
■
Richard Figueroa, Acting Director of DHCS, was replaced by Will Lightbourne, when
he was named Director of DHCS.
Will Lightbourne was replaced by his successor at DHCS, Michelle Baass.
Peter Lee, Executive Director of Covered California, retired and was replaced by his
successor at Covered California, Jessica Altman.7
The Healthy California for All Commission was established as a result of California policy
discussions related to systems of unified financing for health care, including but not limited
to single payer approaches. For that reason, the Commission's public discussion and this
report focus primarily on how funds currently used to pay for health care in California could
be combined and used to secure accessible, affordable, equitable and high-quality health
care for all Californians. A different - and extremely consequential - conversation might
address the steps California could take, financial and otherwise, to advance health and
health equity for all of its residents. Many commissioners advocated for additional work to
identify investments in social services and social drivers of health that are clearly linked to
the Commission's ambitious agenda. Because many drivers of health and well-being are
outside of the health care delivery system, additional investments and interventions to
improve social drivers of health should be developed in coordination with changes to the
health care delivery system. Due to the Commission's scope, this report does not do full
justice to the many ways - other than those associated with health care financing - by
which the health of Californians might be improved.
Timeline and Process
The Commission held its first meeting on January 27, 2020. With the outbreak of the novel
coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, the Commission canceled its scheduled meeting in April
2020 and resumed meeting virtually, starting in June 2020.
The table below shows the dates of Commission meetings and key topics addressed at
each meeting.
Meeting date:
January 27, 2020
June 12, 2020
Topics addressed:
History of health reform in California
Current state of health care in California
Draft Environmental Analysis Report
■
■
6 State of California Department of Justice, Open Meetings, accessed 12/21/21.
7 Jessica Altman replaced Peter Lee as Executive Director of Covered California on March 7, 2022.
15Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Meeting date:
July 8, 2020
August 13, 2020
May 21, 2021
June 25, 2021
July 8, 2021
August 25, 2021
September 23,
2021
September 28,
2021
October 11, 2021
November 17, 2021
Topics addressed:
■
■
■
■
■
■
Future meeting schedule
Unified financing and coverage: Key design elements and
options
o Equity and quality under unified financing
Final Environmental Analysis Report
O
In an advisory vote, the Commission voted 10-2 to
accept the final Environmental Analysis Report and
transmit it to the Governor and the Legislature.
Unified financing: potential effects and design options
Overview and discussion of consulting team's
analytic findings
O
Unified financing: direct payment models
O Presentation by Commissioner William Hsiao
Unified financing direct payment models: Vermont case
study
O Presentation by former Vermont Governor Peter
Shumlin
Advancing accountability, integration, and care coordination
under unified financing
O Panel discussion by Commissioners Peter Lee,
Sandra Hernandez, and Anthony Wright
Behavioral health integration and accountability
O Presentation by Commissioner Will Lightbourne,
Director, Department of Health Care Services, and
Jacey Cooper, State Medicaid Director.
Systems of accountability to assure improved equity, quality
and access
O Presentations by Commissioners Richard Scheffler
and Sara Flocks
Summary of community engagement findings
State/federal relationship and financing mechanisms
O Presentations by Commissioners Carmen Comsti and
Andy Schneider
Racial equity and health system design
O
Presentations by Commissioners Antonia Hernandez
and Robert Ross
Commissioner survey on goals, values, propositions
Provider payments under unified financing
O Presentation by Commissioner Don Moulds
O
O Presentation by Dana Gelb Safran, President and
CEO of the National Quality Forum, on value-based
payments and health equity
Presentation by Joshua Sharfstein, MD, Johns
Hopkins University, on global budgets
Financial sustainability under unified financing
O Presentation by Ken Jacobs, UC Berkeley Labor
Center, on projected spending and funding options
16Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Meeting date:
December 9, 2021
February 23, 2022
Topics addressed:
O Mechanisms to reduce health care costs
Ensuring a Smooth Transition
o Follow-up conversation on Long Term Services and
Supports by Commissioner Jennie Chin Hansen
Transition discussion with opening comments by
Commissioners Carmen Comsti, Anthony Wright and
William Hsiao
o
Cost Sharing Under Unified Financing
The Role of Coordinating Entity(ies) Under Unified
Financing
■
At the June 12, 2020 meeting of the Commission, Commissioner Dr. Robert Ross
suggested that gathering structured input from residents of California with low incomes -
those who potentially will benefit most from a unified system of financing for health care
was extremely important to the Commission's deliberations. Several other commissioners
supported this direction. The consulting team began working in 2020 with CalHHS to
organize this process. In the following months, Bobbie Wunsch of the consulting team twice
described to regular meetings of the Commission a set of proposed community engagement
activities that took into consideration pandemic conditions, target population groups and
draft discussion topics. After a long break due to the COVID-19 pandemic, CalHHS
recommended that the three foundations whose CEOs serve as commissioners
independently organize and fund a robust community engagement process in order to
gather the perspectives of Californians with low incomes. The process culminated in a
September 21, 2021 webinar to share results with commissioners and members of the
public. For more, see this report's Community Engagement section.
Prior Work on the Shortcomings of the Current Fragmented Financing System
The Commission's first deliverable, An Environmental Analysis of Health Care Delivery,
Coverage, and Financing in California (August, 2020) provided context on how health care
is arranged and paid for in California today, suggested steps California could take to
prepare to transition to unified financing, and described coverage expansion options. This
section offers a brief summary of the Environmental Analysis.
In recent years California has built on opportunities available under the federal Affordable
Care Act (ACA) and has enacted state legislation to increase coverage and affordability for
low and modest-income residents. As a result, California has made great progress in
expanding coverage to many state residents and addressing some of the coverage, access
and affordability gaps that were pervasive prior to passage of the ACA. For several
reasons, however, California has not achieved universal coverage to date. Many
undocumented Californians have been left out; some who are eligible for coverage find
premiums unaffordable; and the process of understanding and enrolling in coverage is
complicated and can lead many people to experience gaps in coverage.
17Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Beyond questions of coverage, a range of pervasive and troubling features of California's
fragmented health care financing system compromise access, affordability, quality and
equity. These include:
• Rising health care spending that takes an increasing share of the state's economy
and public sector budgets;
Persistent worries among Californians about their ability to afford medical costs;
Disparities in health status and health care access by race, ethnicity, and income;8
Where quality indicators have been identified and goals set, shortcomings in the
quality of care and disparities across racial and ethnic groups;
For many care outcomes and communities, a lack of clarity about what constitutes
health care quality, how and by whom it might be advanced;
An unevenly distributed health care workforce that does not reflect the state's
cultural, racial and language diversity;
Looming workforce shortages, including among primary care providers, nurses and
many other health care workers;
A diversity of provider payment arrangements, each with potential shortcomings.
Fee-for-service payments provide poor incentives for improved quality, care
coordination, and efficient resource use. Capitation is prevalent among California
medical groups and provides incentives to deliver care more efficiently, but raises
concerns among critics about stinting on care.
Increasing market concentration among hospitals, insurers and physicians, which
contributes to higher prices, particularly in some California regions;9⁹
High administrative costs, both for payers and providers; and
• Conflicting and counter-productive provider incentives exerted by different payers,
which impede transparency and accountability and make it more difficult to achieve a
single high standard of quality.
As described in the Commission's Environmental Analysis and at length in the remainder of
this report, a system of unified financing will address the shortcomings of our current
fragmented financing system.
8 For a discussion of recent California efforts to advance health equity, see Scheffler R, Shane O. Health
Equity: California Style. Milbank Quarterly Opinion. December 2, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1599/mqop.2021.1202
9 The issue of provider consolidation and its impact on competition and prices was covered in depth on pp. 52-
56 of the Commission's previous report, An Environmental Analysis of Health Care Delivery, Coverage, and
Financing in California.
18Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Report Structure
This remainder of the report is organized as follows:
A summary of commissioners' feedback on the goals, values and key propositions
that should guide the work of the Commission;
•
Insights from community engagement research;
• Analytic findings describing the potential effects of UF on health spending and other
outcomes;
Discussion of decisions and actions needed to achieve unified financing;
A description of steps underway and within state control that will advance desired
health care outcomes and may influence the path for UF implementation; and
Observations about priority actions and next steps that will continue momentum
toward UF after the Commission process concludes.
Goals and Values
Commissioners endorsed the vision of a "Healthy California for All" in which a sustainable
unified financing system for health care services provides safe, timely, efficient, equitable
and person-centered health care that advances the mental and physical health and well-
being of all Californians. The system would ensure that care is high-quality, affordable and
accessible. All Californians would feel empowered through a simplified system that treats
them with respect and promotes equity across social and demographic factors, including by
race and ethnicity. To that end, Californians would be treated by caregivers who understand
their cultures, beliefs and values so the care they receive is relevant for them and their
families.
Commissioners expressed general agreement with the following seven principles:
1. The health care system should address not just the acute, short-term needs of
individuals but should focus on prevention, early intervention and population health
approaches to limiting disease and improving health.
2. California's health care system should optimize care for people with complex needs
by facilitating close communication and coordination among health care providers,
including those delivering primary care, specialty care, behavioral health services and
long-term services and supports.
3. Access to care, quality of care and health outcomes for individuals and for
populations should be monitored and transparently reported. Accountability for high-
quality, equitable outcomes (with particular attention to outcomes for people with
complex conditions and high needs, and with emphasis on historical racial and ethnic
disparities) should be established.
4. Provider payments and funding, including methods of payment and levels of
payment, should address inequities and improve access and quality.
5. The unified financing system for health care services should proactively monitor,
mitigate, and work to eliminate disparities in health care access and quality, including
those resulting from structural discrimination related to race and ethnicity, those
19Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
associated with income, immigration status, disability, sexual orientation and gender
identity, and the intersectional effects among these and other characteristics.
6. The health care system should, in coordination with other sectors, address social
drivers that compromise health status. 10
7. A new universal, unified health care system requires long-term commitments from the
federal government and the State of California and will require sustainable financing.
(Many commissioners noted that substituting a broad and progressive funding
approach for the current mechanisms through which Californians pay for their health
coverage and care would improve equity and transparency and reduce complexity.)
11
Through surveys, commissioners also weighed in on a number of more detailed goals and
propositions. Detailed responses are available through summarized survey responses.
The specific statements offered for commissioner input are presented at Appendix A.
Unified financing creates levers and opportunities to achieve these goals, as discussed in
Commission meetings and throughout this report. These gains could be achieved with lower
health expenditures than in our current system and could be financed in a way that is
sustainable over time and more progressive than our current system, as described later in
the Analytic Findings section.
As further described in the next section on Community Engagement, there was alignment
between Commissioner values and input obtained from the public, particularly with respect
to the broad goals of access, affordability and equity. Some commissioners noted that
shared values for health system improvement - for example, treating all Californians with
respect, promoting equity and reducing health disparities across social and demographic
factors, focusing on prevention - could be advanced through means other than unified
financing.
Community Engagement
The Commission decided early in its deliberations that it was important to gather input from
community residents with low-incomes throughout the state as well as from
underrepresented populations to better inform the deliberations of the Commission. Before
the COVID-19 pandemic, a series of community conversations was proposed to the
Commission and commissioners provided feedback and suggestions to refine the proposal.
10 Although a majority of responding Commissioners agreed with this statement, Commissioner Flocks and
Commissioner Comsti disagreed - the only instance among these seven statements in which multiple
commissioners directly disagreed (as opposed to indicating they "didn't know" or "agreed with slight
modifications"). Their responses cited concerns that to address social drivers would be beyond the scope and
capacity of the health care system, might come at expense of reduced health care funds, and/or could
compromise system sustainability. Commissioner Flocks further clarified that she feels "our state must address
social determinants but… requiring the health care system to take on that burden distracts from the core
mission of providing high-quality, equitable, affordable care in a sustainable system."
11 Complete survey findings are available at the Healthy California for All webpage. See "Meeting Information"
documents for September 28, 2021 survey synthesis and the November 17, 2021 survey report.
20Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
After the commission's break during the early pandemic response, the mandate for deeper
community engagement became even stronger. The health and health care access
inequities and disparities seen through the lens of COVID-19 were staggering and the
impact on communities historically disenfranchised and disconnected from our health care
system was further unmasked. The cumulative impact on minority populations in California
was seen across the board with health, social, education and economic implications. Upon
return to regular Commission meetings, the primacy of the community engagement work led
to a keen focus to engage the stakeholder networks already attending to COVID-19 in the
Commission's work. Engaging the communities often outside the health care reform
conversations can no longer be tolerated if we are to create a true Healthy California for All.
When the Commission began to meet again virtually, there was a renewed effort to gather
input from people of color, LGBTQ+, indigenous and other Californians with low incomes
whose voices are often missing from policy conversations. Commission Chair, Secretary Dr.
Mark Ghaly, asked three commissioners representing the California Health Care
Foundation, the California Community Foundation, and The California Endowment to
organize these community engagement efforts, given their long history and commitment to
working with community residents and stakeholders on closely related policy issues. The
three foundations and their staff commissioned a multi-method stakeholder input process to
gain input from diverse communities. Almost 2000 Californians with low incomes from
across the state participated and contributed their time and perspectives to this process.
The full set of findings are available at the Healthy California for All web page with
highlights provided below.
Community Engagement Approach
To achieve comprehensive engagement, while navigating the limitations for in-person
events due to the pandemic and the short time frame of this project, the process included
the following three elements:
1. Health Care Experiences and Priorities of Californians with Low Incomes: A
synthesis of existing research and literature related to the health care experiences
and perspectives of Californians with low incomes and communities of color that
draws from 15 reports, polling, enrollment and utilization data, and consumer
listening sessions from 2012-2021.
2. Views on Improving the Health Care System among Californians with Limited
Incomes: Qualitative and quantitative independent non-partisan public opinion
research engaging Californians with incomes under 250% of the federal poverty
level, including: a) two three-day online discussion boards in English and Spanish
and b) a statistically representative multilingual poll of 1,982 Californians, including
oversamples of African American, Asian Pacific Islander and Native American
households conducted in English, Spanish, Chinese, Vietnamese, Hmong, Korean
21Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
and Tagalog from August 19-September 5, 2021. Californians with incomes under
250% of the federal poverty level represent about one third of California's population.
3. Views and Perspectives from Community Based Organizations Serving
Californians with Low Incomes: Phone interviews, virtual listening sessions with
and survey of over 60 leaders of community-based organizations (CBO), including
health advocacy and direct service organizations across the state conducted in
August and September 2021.
Findings Related to A Single Statewide Health Care Program
Both the public opinion poll and the community-based organization leader interviews and
surveys conducted show strong support for a single, statewide, government-run health care
program that covers all people who live in California. The poll suggests that 65 percent of
Californians with low incomes support the concept, with people of color showing greater
support: 76 percent of African Americans, 71 percent of Latinos, 73 percent of Asian/Pacific
Islanders, 65 percent of Native Americans and 54 percent of whites. Support among
LGBTQ+ Californians was extremely widespread at 82%. Support varied slightly with
coverage status: those with Medi-Cal (74%) and the uninsured (70%) were more likely to
support the concept than those with employer-sponsored insurance (62%), Medicare (57%),
or "other" health insurance (51%). Similarly, a majority of community-based organization
leaders indicated support for the concept of a single statewide government-run health care
program.
The community engagement effort explored levels of satisfaction with existing insurance
arrangements. Among currently insured Californians with low incomes, the majority (80%)
was either somewhat (41%) or very satisfied (39%) with their coverage. The leading
concerns among Californians who were somewhat (11%) or very (8%) dissatisfied with their
current coverage included cost of services and not covering all services. Paying for care
was a major concern not just for the uninsured, but for people with employer-sponsored
insurance, Covered California and Medi-Cal; paying for care was less of a challenge for
those on Medicare. Among concerns experienced even after seeing a health care
professional, affording a prescription, receiving insurance approval for a treatment, and not
having their concerns heard stood out most.
The community engagement work found that Californians with low incomes would value
three key attributes of a reimagined health care system, described further below.
Cost and Affordability
The synthesis of existing research, the statewide poll and the CBO interview data all confirm
that cost and affordability are the top barriers to receiving care for Californians with low
incomes and that affordability is a top priority area to address in a future health system.
22Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
In the statewide poll, 63 percent of Californians with low incomes identify the cost of health
care as a very serious problem in California, as the top barrier to accessing health care (58
percent labeling it a challenge that they face), and as the improvement to health care they
most want (a 49 percent plurality making it a first or second choice compared to other
priorities).
Similarly, in the statewide poll, when asked about envisioning a new system, 73 percent of
Californians with low incomes said eliminating out-of-pocket costs like co-pays and
deductibles would be "very important" in an improved health system and 67 percent felt
similarly about eliminating monthly insurance premiums. Consistent with the synthesis of
existing research, CBO leaders unanimously agreed that copayments and premiums
routinely cause individuals to delay or forego necessary care and do not effectively reduce
the provision of unnecessary care. Similarly, the leaders strongly believe that "cost controls
must be put in place on insurance companies and other system players that many believe
contribute to affordability issues due to their priority for increasing profits."
Access to Care
Consistent with the synthesis of existing research, the statewide poll and CBO interviews
confirm that having health coverage, though necessary, is insufficient for accessing care
and providers. CBO leaders consistently cited the hardships experienced by Californians
with low incomes in navigating, understanding, and utilizing an overly complex system and
that these hardships shut people out of adequate access. A majority of Californians with low
incomes particularly people of color identified long waits at doctors' offices (58 percent) and
a lack of available appointments (53 percent) as among the top challenges to accessing
care. These results are consistent with the findings in the synthesis of existing research that
found nearly 60 percent of Californians with low incomes reporting they had to wait longer
than they thought was reasonable for a medical appointment. CBO leaders almost
universally agreed that effective system navigation must be an essential component to
improve access.
The synthesis of existing research shows that social determinants such as immigration
status, transportation barriers and others impact access to health care and this is
particularly true for people of color, and members of LGBTQ+ and rural communities.
Californians with low incomes want their health providers to understand these non-clinical
factors that impact their health and when asked about priorities in a new statewide health
system, 74 percent of poll respondents indicated that providing connections to services that
help people stay healthy, like housing, transportation and healthy food is important. CBO
leaders believe the health system should support preventive care and "upstream"
interventions.
Having access to comprehensive and integrated services was also repeated by Californians
surveyed as well as CBO leaders. A large majority of Californians feel a new statewide
system should provide dental and vision care (84 percent), long term care (79 percent),
23Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
mental health (79 percent) connections to social services (74 percent) and treatment for
alcohol or drug use problems (71 percent). Similarly, CBO leaders agree dental, vision,
mental and behavioral health are important to consider in a new statewide health system
and that ideally, people would like to address their health care needs in one place and for
their providers to work together to address their holistic health needs.
Cultural Humility and Respect
In addition to affordability and access, Californians with low incomes continue to seek care
and services in a health system that perpetuates inequities. A system that values cultural
humility and respect is a top priority among Californians with low incomes and CBO leaders.
The synthesis of existing research found high rates of stigmatizing and disrespectful
treatment in clinical care experienced by persons of color, individuals with Limited English
Proficiency (LEP), people with disabilities and LGBTQ+ people in California. The statewide
poll found that nearly one-third of Californians of color with low incomes who indicated
difficulty in accessing care said that they felt discriminated against by staff or a health care
provider at their doctor's office or clinic. Interviews with CBO leaders found that over 60
percent cited language access as a major barrier in providing culturally competent care and
systemic biases within the health system continue to be perpetuated against specific
population groups. When asked for priorities in a new statewide health system, over 90
percent of poll respondents indicated that health care leaders should prioritize "safe and
effective treatment” and a system that “treats everyone with dignity and respect."
Consumer Engagement in Care and System Design
Engagement of consumers in both clinical care and design of the health system continues
to be expressed as a desire by Californians with lower incomes. The synthesis of existing
research confirms that consumers experience poor clinical engagement such as short
appointments or poor explanation of medical procedures or medications. The statewide poll
corroborates these findings, as the lack of attention from doctors is reported as one of the
most common barriers to receiving care. Similarly, 88 percent of poll respondents indicated
that they would like to have a role in decision-making about their health care.
Beyond engagement in clinical care decisions, Californians with low incomes would also like
to be engaged in the overall system design. Key issues specifically mentioned as barriers to
engaging include system navigation difficulties and lack of transparency (i.e., unclear
grievance processes). CBO leaders and the synthesis of existing research suggest that
enhanced integration of community-based organizations into the health system may be one
option for helping to strengthen agency among consumers, while simultaneously addressing
cultural competency and workforce issues.
24Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Analytic Approach and Findings
Analytic Approach
The purpose of the analytic effort was to understand the broad, directional effects of UF. To
advance that goal, the consulting team made assumptions about how UF could be
implemented under a range of scenarios. These assumptions and scenarios were
determined in consultation with CalHHS. Informed by California's policy context and existing
research regarding the health care system, the assumptions and scenarios emerged from
an assessment of the salience of alternative approaches for the Commission's work.
Because it was not the role of the consulting team to make design decisions - nor, given its
scope and timeline, could the Commission fully specify exactly how UF should be designed
— the assumptions made and scenarios modeled do not reflect value judgements nor are
they intended to be determinative of how California proceeds toward UF.
13
A few commissioners have offered critiques of the analytic approach. In some cases,
commissioners' divergent views about the likelihood or desirability of various scenarios
caused them to question whether scenarios should be contemplated at all.12 For example,
Commissioner Scheffler noted that integrated delivery systems paid via capitation are
prevalent in California¹³ and that such arrangements exert cost discipline on providers
while, according to many analyses, offering higher quality outcomes. ¹4 Since the direct
payment approach would eliminate health plans and capitated payments, Commissioner
Scheffler argued against any analysis of an approach in which a state UF authority makes
direct payments to health care providers, because that would be a radical departure from
California's long shift away from fee-from-service payment approaches. The direct payment
12 For example, on comments on the draft report, Commissioner Hsiao and Commissioner Scheffler each
disputed the desirability of presenting estimates of a direct payment scenario in which capitation payments are
eliminated. Commissioner Comsti argued that the analysis mistakenly conflates direct payment with fee-for-
service payment arrangements for physicians and suggested that a number of alternative payment
arrangements, such as physician salaries or time-based payments, could be substitute for fee-for-service
payments. However, these alternatives were not sufficiently specified to lend themselves to further analysis.
Commissioner Hsiao also noted that he felt estimated reductions in provider administration expenses were too
low and that savings beyond those estimated by the consulting team could be achieved through reduced
claims fraud and abuse.
13 From the Commission's environmental analysis, pp. 58-59: "HMO patients account for approximately 60% of
privately insured and Medicare patients in California and thus capitation accounts for approximately 60% of
payments to medical groups in California. Capitation also accounts for virtually all payments for inpatient and
outpatient facility services for Medicare Advantage patients, but for privately insured HMO patients, inpatient
and outpatient facility services are mostly paid on a fee-for-service basis. In total, capitation accounts for
approximately 14% of payments for inpatient and outpatient facility care for privately insured and Medicare
patients." Additionally, the Commission's environmental analysis, pg. 39, describes the prevalence of
managed care delivery systems in the Medi-Cal program: "Managed care is also prevalent in public programs.
An additional 10.8 million Californians are enrolled in Medi-Cal managed care, representing a managed care
penetration rate of 83 percent."
14 See, for example, James, Brent C. and Gregory P. Poulsen, The Case For Capitation, Harvard Business
Review, July-August 2016 and The Berkeley Forum for Improving California's Health Care Delivery System
report. The Berkeley Forum, an in-depth effort through which California public and private leaders considered
options for improving access to health coverage and care while slowing the rate of health care expenditure
growth, recommended reducing the share of health care expenditures paid for via fee-for-service and
increasing the share of the state's population receiving care via fully- or highly-integrated care systems.
25Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
option was included, however, because Commissioner Comsti objected to any scenario in
which providers or plans assumed financial risk, and thus opposed any scenario that
envisioned continuation of capitated payments to medical groups. Commissioner Comsti
and many single-payer advocates argued that including health plans or other risk-bearing
intermediaries would introduce obstacles to care and encourage actions that served
corporate financial motives rather than the needs of Californians.
Analytic Findings
As discussed at Commission meetings, and as shown in an analysis conducted by the
consulting team, implementing a system of unified financing (UF) is expected to bring
substantial and valuable benefits to Californians. 15 The analysis conducted by the
consulting team early in the Commission's process identified the following high level findings
pertaining to health spending and financing:
Unified financing is expected in lower total health care expenditures in the aggregate
than under the status quo in the first year of implementation under most scenarios
analyzed, and savings over time under all scenarios analyzed, even when long-term
care services and supports are included as covered services ¹6;
16.
Assuming that the federal and state governments support UF at the level they would
have supported the status quo fragmented financing, the savings from UF will accrue
to California employers and households, who will pay less to support UF than they
pay in the status quo; and
Financing can be stable over time, but will depend on controlling cost growth and
securing agreements with the federal government about the rate of growth in federal
payments.
Analytic findings on spending and financing are summarized below. In addition, a few
results on access, equity, and health outcomes are summarized, although many of the
expected benefits of UF discussed by Commissioners, including increases in equity,
reductions in the administrative burden experienced by patients and providers, and
improvements in population health outcomes do not lend themselves to precise quantitative
forecasts.
To estimate the effects of UF on health spending and other outcomes, the consulting team
assumed:
15 See Healthy California for All webpage for a summary of analytic findings; a description of the methods and
assumptions underlying the analysis; comments from multiple authors on methods and assumptions (see
Reports tab/ Methods and Assumptions topic); an Excel spreadsheet supporting the description of Methods
and Assumptions; the consulting team's response to comments on methods and assumptions by
Commissioner Carmen Comsti as well as the team's response to comments from California Association of
Health Plans and California Association of Health Underwriters; and a presentation to the Commission on
financing considerations on November 17, 2021.
16 Note: In a scenario with LTSS expansion and no cost-sharing, expenditures would be somewhat higher in
year 1 than under the current system (2% higher than the status quo, or $10 billion), but over the ten-year
period health expenditures would be $213 billion lower than in the current system if spending grows at the rate
of GDP growth.
26Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
All Californians would be covered by a comprehensive package of benefits;
Provider payments would, on average, be made at current levels, minus estimated
reduction in costs due to lower billing and insurance related costs; and
A substantial reduction in prices paid for prescription drugs.
In three areas, the consulting team estimated the effects of UF under alternative scenarios
about design decisions:
●
Cost sharing: In one scenario, the team assumed that Californians would face no
cost sharing; in a second scenario, the team assumed that Californians in families
with income below 138% of the Federal Poverty Line (FPL) would face no cost
sharing; that those with incomes between 138%-400% of FPL would pay, on
average, 6% of medical expenses (i.e., receive coverage with a 94% Actuarial Value
(AV)); and that those in families with incomes above 400% of the FPL would pay, on
average, 15% of medical expenses (i.e., 85% AV).
Use of intermediaries: In one scenario, similar to Canada and consistent with the
views of many advocates on what constitutes a "pure" single payer approach, the
team assumed that the UF authority would make direct payments to hospitals,
physicians, and other health care providers, and that Californians would receive
coverage for services from any licensed provider. In a second scenario, similar to
Germany and the Netherlands, the team assumed that the UF authority would make
payments to health plans or health systems, and that Californians would be required
to enroll in a health plan or health system and would receive care from the providers
that were part of that plan or system.
Long Term Services and Supports: In one scenario, the team assumed that
coverage for LTSS would be expanded, as specified in an option modelled by the
Congressional Budget Office. 17 In a second scenario, the team assumed coverage
for LTSS as in the status quo¹8, with a continuation of Medi-Cal coverage for LTSS
services including but not limited to IHSS and nursing home care. Commissioners
expressed strong support for including expanded coverage for LTSS services in
unified financing. Results are shown with and without LTSS expansion to illustrate
the impact of that design decision.
The consulting team's analytic findings are predicated on California being able to achieve
the necessary federal and state-level approvals which are discussed in later sections of this
17 Congressional Budget Office, How CBO Analyzes Proposals for a Single-Payer Health Care System,
December 10, 2020
18 The primary payer for long-term services and supports (LTSS) care is Medicaid (Medi-Cal in California).
Medicare covers some short-term skilled nursing care but does not cover LTSS. Relatively few people have
private insurance coverage for long-term care (7-9 million people throughout the US in 2011, per the Kaiser
Family Foundation).
27Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
report. Further consideration of key design considerations is presented below in the section
titled Decisions and Actions Needed to Implement Unified Financing.
Supporting documents offer further information about analytic methods and assumptions. 19
Estimated Changes in Health Spending in Year 1
The analysis estimated that if UF were implemented in California using direct payment to
providers, no cost sharing for patients, and without expansion of LTSS coverage, aggregate
health spending in the first year of UF would be 3% lower than under the status quo
fragmented financing system (Table 1). If, for illustrative purposes, the first year of full
implementation were 2022, the analysis estimated that in the scenario described above,
health spending would be $501 billion, or $16 billion less than in the status quo.20
With income-related cost sharing, spending would be reduced by $35 billion from the status
quo in a scenario without an LTSS expansion, or 7% of baseline spending; while in a
scenario with income-related cost sharing and expansion of LTSS, spending would be
reduced by $9 billion from the status quo, or 2% of baseline spending. The only scenario the
consulting team analyzed in which Year 1 spending would be greater than under baseline is
the scenario with an LTSS expansion and no cost sharing, in which spending would be $10
billion, or 2% greater than in the status quo. As discussed later in this section, even in that
scenario cumulative savings would be expected over the first nine years of UF.
If health plans or health systems were used as intermediaries, expected health expenditures
under UF would be very similar to estimated spending in the direct payment scenario (Table
1).21 As in the direct payment scenario, expenditures in the health plan or health systems
scenario are expected to be less than in the status quo in the first year of UF under three of
the four scenarios modelled. As in the direct payment scenario, expenditures are expected
to be somewhat greater than in the status quo if LTSS is expanded and there is no cost
sharing.
19 See Healthy California for All webpage for description of the methods and assumptions underlying the
analysis, as well as a spreadsheet and companion guide explaining in more detail the expenditures analysis.
20 Full implementation of UF would not be possible in 2022 given both the time needed to secure state and
federal approvals and the time needed to implement the new system. 2022 is used as Year 1 throughout the
analysis to ground the figures in current dollars and to avoid speculation about how long it would take to
implement UF, a topic which the Commission did not discuss in depth.
21 The point estimate for savings in the direct payment scenario is slightly greater than the point estimate for
savings in the health plans or health systems scenario - a difference of $4 billion, or a little less than 1% of
health spending. As discussed in the Methods and Assumptions document, there is considerable uncertainty
around all of these estimates. Given the inherent uncertainty in the estimates, as well as a difference between
the estimates of less than 1% of health spending, the estimates can be broadly characterized as ‘similar’.
28Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Table 1: Estimated Total California Health Expenditures under Baseline and Unified
Financing, 2022
Scenario
Baseline
UF: Direct payment to providers
No cost sharing, no LTSS
expansion
Income-related cost sharing, no
LTSS expansion
Income-related cost sharing,
with LTSS expansion
No cost sharing, with LTSS
expansion
UF: Health plan or health system role
No cost sharing, no LTSS
expansion
Income-related cost sharing, no
LTSS expansion
Income-related cost sharing,
with LTSS expansion
No cost sharing, with LTSS
expansion
California Health
Care Expenditures,
2022
($ billion)
$517
$501
$482
$508
$527
$505
$486
$513
$532
Change in
Expenditures under
UF Compared to
Baseline
-$16 (-3%)
-$35 (-7%)
-$9 (-2%)
+$10 (2%)
-$12 (-2%)
-$31 (-6%)
-$4 (-1%)
+$15 (3%)
In the direct payment scenario, health care utilization is expected to increase substantially
as a result of expanding coverage to all, covering adult dental services, the elimination (or
reduction) of patient copayments, and the unwinding of managed care (Figure 1).22 Further,
spending is expected to increase in order to invest in a just transition for administrative
workers and to create a reserve fund that would provide stability to UF in the face of
fluctuations in health care spending and in recession-induced reductions in revenues. 23 The
estimated increases in spending associated with these changes are expected to be more
than compensated for by decreases in spending resulting from reductions in the
administrative costs of health plans and insurers; reductions in the billing and insurance-
related costs borne by physicians, hospitals, and other providers; reductions in the
reimbursement received by these providers to assure that patients and tax payers receive
22 In the scenario with income-related cost sharing, the analysis estimates that utilization will not increase by
as much as in the scenario with no cost sharing. In the scenario with income-related cost sharing, the analysis
assumes that some employers will offer supplemental benefits to assure that no employee faces higher out-of-
pocket exposure under Unified Financing than they do in the status quo.
23 The analysis assumes that reserves would be built up over the first 10 years such that the state has financial
reserves equivalent to 10% state health funding to cover fluctuations in revenue resulting from economic
downturns plus the equivalent of 5.2% to 11.7% of claims (depending on option) to cover fluctuations in
claims. The analysis assumes that reserves would initially be funded with a $20 billion 30-year bond and then
the remainder would be built up annually over a 10-year period.
29Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
the financial benefit of the reduced billing and insurance-related costs; and substantial
reductions in the prices paid for pharmaceuticals.
Figure 1: Changes to 2022 Total Health Expenditures, Direct Payment Scenario
Universal coverage
1.1%
Expanding adult dental
Zero cost sharing
Lower drug prices -5.8%
Unwinding managed care
Provider administrative savings
Payer administrative savings
Just transition for administrative workers
Reserves
Total of all changes above
Expanding long-term services and supports
-4.3%
-5.3%
-3.1%
I 0.3%
■ 0.4%
0.9%
5.7% income-
3.9%
(or 1.6% with
5.0%
related cost
sharing)
As shown in Table 2, estimated spending in the scenario in which health plans or health
systems were used as intermediaries is very similar -- $3.8 billion higher, or 0.7% of total
spending - than in the scenario in which direct payments were made to providers. Although
total spending is expected to be similar in the two scenarios, the composition of spending
differs somewhat in the two scenarios. In the scenario assuming health plans or health
systems play an intermediary role, estimated administrative costs to pay the plans or
systems are higher than in the direct payment scenario, and the savings from reduced
billing and insurance related costs are lower (Table 2). These increases in spending are
largely balanced by an estimated increase in utilization in the direct payment scenario due
to the elimination of risk-based capitation and the elimination of health plan efforts at
reducing low-value care, 24 which is accompanied by an increase in spending for services.
24 Defining "low-value" vs "needed" health involves a degree of subjectivity and nuance. "Choosing Wisely" is
a multi-year effort to encourage communication between providers and patients that supports patients'
choosing care that is supported by evidence; not duplicative; free from harm; and necessary. Such efforts are
intended to reduce low-value services. More information is available at https://www.choosingwisely.org/.
30Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Table 2: Change in Total Health Expenditures Compared to Baseline Spending in Scenarios
With and Without a Role for Health Plans or Health Systems
Scenarios
*
Universal coverage,
expanding adult dental,
zero cost sharing, lower
drug prices*
Unwinding managed care
Provider administrative
savings
Payer administrative
savings
Just transition for
administrative workers
Reserves
Net change
UF: Direct
Payment to
Providers
Changes shown in
Figure 1, do not vary
between options
●
3.9%
-4.3%
-5.3%
●
0.4%
●
0.9%
UF: Health Plan
or Health
System Role
Changes shown in
Figure 1, do not
vary between
options
0.0%
-2.0%
-2.4%
0.2%
0.7%
31
Difference
Assumes long-term services and supports not expanded
Note: Due to rounding, difference may not appear to correspond with column sum.
Changes shown in
Figure 1, do not vary
between options
-3.9%
2.2%
Health Spending Over Time
By 2031, spending under the status quo is projected to grow by $158 billion in current
dollars, using health expenditure growth projections by the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS). Employer and household spending is projected to grow by $47
billion, federal spending by $92 billion, and state and local spending on Medi-Cal and IHSS
by $16 billion.
2.8%
Under UF, a reduction in the rate of spending growth could be accomplished by a number of
mechanisms, including:
Reducing fraud and abuse; 25
Reducing the provision of care that provides little or no patient benefit;
Investments in primary care and prevention that result in improved health and less
demand for care;
-0.2%
-0.3%
0.7%
Reducing the rate of diffusion of new technology;
Reduced duplication of services resulting from improved health information
exchange; and
• Reducing the rate of growth in prices.
25 See comments from Commissioner William Hsiao on fraud and abuse in health care claims and the potential
for related savings under unified financing.Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Annual expenditure growth under UF after Year 1 is estimated under two scenarios:
1. Health spending grows at the National Health Expenditure (NHE) growth rates
projected by Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) minus 0.5% per year;
and
2. Health spending grows at the rate of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The GDP
growth rate option is approximately equivalent to the NHE growth rate minus 1.3%.
If health spending under UF grows more slowly than in the status quo, the reduction in
spending will result in substantial savings for Californians. In the direct payment scenario in
which spending grows 0.5% per year more slowly than in the status quo, estimated
cumulative savings over the 2022-2031 period range from $32 to $535 billion in 2022 dollars
(Table 3), depending on whether income-related cost sharing is applied and whether LTSS
is expanded. With LTSS expansion and no cost sharing, expenditures would be somewhat
higher in year 1 than under the current system (2% higher than the status quo, or $10
billion, as shown in Table 1), but over the ten-year period health expenditures would be
$213 billion lower than in the current system if spending grows at the rate of GDP growth
(Table 3). In a scenario with a health plan or health system role under UF, estimated
cumulative savings are also significant, as shown in Table 3.
32Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Table 3: Estimated Cumulative Savings ($ Billions) under UF Compared to the Status Quo
under Two Growth Rate Scenarios, 2022-2031
UF Scenario
Growth rate:
GDP
$698
$496
$416
$213
$655
$451
$359
$155
Adopting a unified financing system will not automatically reduce the rate of growth of health
expenditures. The rate of growth will depend on a number of design decisions within UF, as
well as the behavior of the UF governing authority (ies), health care providers, patients, and
the rate of development and deployment of new technologies. However, UF creates both
additional tools to reduce spending growth and the imperative to do so.
Direct payment to providers
Income-related cost sharing, no LTSS
expansion
No cost sharing, no LTSS expansion
Income-related cost sharing, with LTSS
expansion
No cost sharing, with LTSS expansion
Health plan or health system role
Income-related cost sharing, no LTSS
expansion
No cost sharing, no LTSS expansion
Income-related cost sharing, with LTSS
expansion
No cost sharing, with LTSS expansion
Revenue Sources for Year 1 of Unified Financing 26
Growth rate:
NHE less 0.5%
$535
$323
$245
$32
$488
$277
$183
($29)
Under status quo fragmented financing, of the estimated $517 billion that will be spent on
health care in California in 202227, estimated employer and household spending in 2022 will
be $222 billion, federal payments for Medicare, Medi-Cal, IHSS, and ACA Premium Tax
Credits an estimated $204 billion, with state and local Medi-Cal/ IHSS, and 'other' spending
accounting for the remainder (Figure 2). The $222 billion statistic for employer and
household spending represents current health care spending that can be repurposed to
finance the non-federal share of funding needed for UF.28 Further, under UF the financial
burden for the non-federal share of funding can be distributed in ways that are more
equitable than under the existing system, and, as discussed elsewhere in this report, with
greater opportunities to slow health care cost growth. A large share ($143 billion) of the
household and employer spending is accounted for by employer and employee paid
26 This section provides analytic results on Year 1 financing. The 'Stability Over Time' section below provides
results on financing over a longer time horizon.
27 The $517 billion does not include spending on the Veterans Administration, military health services
(including TRICARE), or the Indian Health Service.
28 The estimated $222 billion in employer and household spending does not include an estimated $16 billion in
premiums for Part B and Part D paid by Medicare beneficiaries. The Part B and Part D premium spending is
included in the statistic for Medicare spending.
33Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
premiums. At firms that offer health insurance, employers will be paying an average of 9.9%
of payroll for health insurance in 2022, with employees paying an additional 2.7% of payroll,
on average.29 In addition, employers are projected to spend over $7 billion on the medical
portion of workers' compensation premiums in 2022, or an average of approximately 0.6%
of payroll. 30
Figure 2: Total California health expenditures, 2022
Total CA health expenditures, 2022 = $517 billion
State
and
local,
$45
Federal, $204
Other
spending,
$45
Employer and
household
spending, $222
Employer
insurance
premiums, $113
Workers' comp. $7
Household job-based
premiums, $30
Out-of-pocket
spending, $51
34
All other spending,
$21
As noted above, in a UF scenario with direct payment to providers, no cost sharing, and
without expansion of LTSS, estimated 2022 spending would decline by $16 billion to $501
billion.31 If the federal, state and local, and 'other' funding sources remained at their status
quo level in Year 1, then $207 billion would need to be repurposed from the non-federal
amount currently spent on health care (Figure 3).³2 This $207 billion would replace much of
29 UC Berkeley-UCLA California Simulation of Insurance Markets (CalSIM) 3.0
30 As a percent of payroll, the medical portion of worker's compensation premiums are higher at many low
wage firms that do not offer health insurance.
31 In Figures 3, 4, and 5, results are shown in scenarios that assume direct payments to providers. As was
shown in Table 1, estimated health spending in scenarios in which health plans or health systems are used as
intermediaries is very similar to estimated spending in scenarios in which direct payments are made to
providers. The results in Figures 3, 4, and 5 would change very little if they were presented for the health
plans/health systems scenarios.
32 If the federal government captured some of the Year 1 savings, that would increase the amount of state-
based funds that would need to be raised every year. An additional uncertainty about federal funding and
about how UF might be implemented concerns the treatment of Part B and Part D premiums paid by Medicare
beneficiaries. Medicare beneficiaries can choose whether to enroll in Part B and in Part D, and, if they choose
to enroll, pay a premium that covers approximately 25% of the cost. Under UF, Californians currently enrolled
in Medicare would be covered by the state's UF system, and would presumably no longer pay Part B or Part DKey Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
the $222 billion currently spent on health care by employers and households for premiums
for employer-sponsored insurance and workers' compensation, for out-of-pocket spending,
and for 'other' employer and household spending such as individual market premiums and
Medigap premiums. This $207 billion repurposed from non-federal funds currently spent on
health care would be $16 billion less than employers and households are expected to pay
for health care under the status quo. As was shown in Figure 1 above, lower spending is
projected primarily as a result of decreases in administrative costs for providers and payers
and reductions in the prices paid for pharmaceuticals, partially balanced by increased
spending due to the elimination of uninsurance and underinsurance and new costs for
establishing a reserve fund, for funding a just transition for employees in health care
administration, and, in the direct payment scenario, from increased utilization resulting from
the unwinding of managed care.
Figure 3: Total California health expenditures by payer, 2022
Other spending
State and local
■Federal
■ Employer and household
spending
Non-federal funds repurposed
under UF
$517 billion
$45
$45
$204
$222
Baseline
Note: UF scenario assumes direct payment to providers
$501 billion
$45
$45
$204
$207
UF no cost sharing,
no LTSS expansion
As shown in Figure 4 below, the amount of non-federal money that is needed to support UF
depends on a variety of design choices about how UF would be implemented. Under
different scenarios, the amount needed ranges from $168 billion with income-based cost
sharing and no LTSS expansion, to $233 billion with no cost sharing and expanded LTSS
(Figure 4).
premiums. It is possible that rather than making a payment to the UF authority equal to gross Medicare
spending made on behalf of California Medicare beneficiaries, the federal government would want that
payment to reflect net Medicare spending - that is, gross spending minus Medicare Part B and Part D
premium payments. In that circumstance, the amount needed to fund the non-federal portion of UF financing
would be greater than the estimates shown in Figures 3, 4, and 5.
35Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Figure 4: Total California health expenditures by payer, 2022
$517 billion
$45
$45
$204
$222
Baseline
$482 billion
$45
$45
$204
$20
$168
$501 billion
$45
$45
(cost
sharing)
$204
$207
$508 billion
$45
$45
UF no cost
sharing,
no LTSS
expansion
$204
$20
$194
UF income-
based cost
sharing,
no LTSS
expansion
Note: UF scenarios assume direct payment to providers
UF income-
based cost
sharing,
with LTSS
expansion
$527 billion
$45
$45
$204
$233
UF no cost
sharing,
with LTSS
expansion
■ Other spending
■State and local
■Federal
■ Employer and
household spending
Non-federal funds
repurposed under UF
What follow are hypothetical approaches that could provide core revenues for a unified
financing system, including a variety of broad-based approaches (Table 4). These sources
could be supplemented with a range of other complementary methods that could help meet
additional objectives on equity and incentivizing positive health outcomes.
A payroll tax can be straightforwardly substituted for our current system of job-based
coverage. It would be more progressive than our current system, since payments would be
scaled to income, rather than being a flat ‘head tax' in the current system. One drawback is
that it is a tax on labor, which can distort the demand for labor versus capital. If the state
were to consider a payroll tax, an equal tax for independent contractors should be
considered to avoid creating incentives to circumvent the employment relationship. Each 1%
increase in payroll tax would raise about $14 billion.
Because the total amount of money that needs to be raised from employers and households
will be less under UF than in the status quo, it is plausible that the required payroll tax rate
would be somewhat lower than the average percent of payroll paid now by employers and
employees for employer-sponsored insurance, and that, on average, employers and
employees will end up paying less money than in the status quo. (Of course, the actual rate
needed for a payroll tax depends crucially on decisions about other potential revenue
sources.) However, even if the payroll tax is lower, on average, than the average percent of
payroll paid by employers and employees in the status quo, there will inevitably be winners
and losers. Employers that currently do not offer health insurance will pay more under UF
than in the status quo. Employers with high average wages and relatively young workforces
will also pay more than in the status quo, while employers with relatively low wages and/or
older workforces will pay less than in the status quo. The number and magnitude of winners
and losers could be reduced if the payroll tax, at least for medium and large sized firms,
36Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
were made firm-specific, where the rate was adjusted based on the percent of payroll paid
by the firm prior to the implementation of UF. If this approach were adopted, it would be
important to use it for a phase-in period, and move towards a uniform payroll tax rate after
some period of time. If differential payroll tax rates were made permanent, distortions to the
market would be worrisome, as firms with high tax rates could outsource tasks to, or be
acquired by, firms with low tax rates.
Another option is a broad tax on labor and capital income, which would tax compensation,
corporate profits, unincorporated business income, and interest income. A broad tax is more
progressive than our current financing. It treats capital and labor equally, with no differences
in tax rates based on how income is earned, which minimizes economic distortions. Each
1% broad tax raises an estimated $19 billion.33
A gross receipts tax has the advantage of a large and stable tax base. The drawback is that
it taxes goods and services at every point along a supply chain, which gives an advantage
to firms that are vertically integrated. Gross receipts taxes are also not sensitive to a firm's
ability to pay as it would be a tax on profits. Existing gross receipts taxes tend to be small, in
the 1 percent or less range, and tax rates often vary by industry.34 If considered, the state
may want to consider exempting firms with revenues below a specified threshold to exclude
the smallest businesses. The cost of a gross receipts tax is primarily passed on to
consumers, similar to a sales tax and could be considered more regressive. 35 Each 1
percent of gross receipts tax raises $47 billion.
Another option is extending the sales tax to selected services, such as professional,
technical, and scientific services. As with any consumption tax it has the potential to be
more regressive. Each 1 percent raises $9.5 billion. 36
Finally, the state could also increase personal income tax, to raise $16 billion per 1 percent.
The personal income tax is more volatile than the other sources discussed here, requiring a
larger financial reserve fund.
If combining multiple tax sources, the State should consider options that do not tax the
same base, for example a payroll tax or income tax could be combined with gross receipts
or sales tax.37
Table 4: Estimated revenue from broad based financing options, 2022
33 Estimate based on what could be achieved by building, relatively straightforwardly, on our current tax
system. The base could be broadened with fuller accounting of business income.
34 See for example, https://sftreasurer.org/business/taxes-fees/gross-receipts-tax-gr .
35 Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, "Broad-Based Gross Receipts Taxes: A Worthwhile Alternative?
March 1, 2007, https://itep.org/broad-based-gross-receipts-taxes-a-worthwhile-alternative/
36 This estimate assumes that construction, utilities, health, education, public administration and services
provided by non-profit agencies would be exempt from the tax.
37 For any tax proposal that does not retain the value of the federal tax exclusion on employer-sponsored
insurance, the state could try to seek a change in federal law to recapture some of that revenue.
37Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Tax Base
*
Payroll
Broad tax on labor and capital income: compensation, corporate
profits, unincorporated business income, interest
Gross receipts
Sales Tax on Select Services (excludes construction, utilities,
health, education, accommodation and food services)
Taxable Personal Income
Estimated revenue
per 1 percent*
(Billions 2022 $)
$14
$19
$18*
Aggregate for 1%-point increase in income tax rates. Distribution could vary by tax
bracket.
$47
$9
An important advantage of UF is the ability to finance health care in a more progressive
manner than the regressive financing that underlies employer-sponsored coverage.
One of the greatest inequities in the status quo is the financial burden on low- and middle-
income workers with employer-sponsored insurance. Under the standard economic
assumption that the employer contribution to health insurance is part of the employee's
compensation, average annual premiums plus out-of-pocket costs ($8,115) make up 31.8
percent of income for a single employee earning $25,520 (200 percent of FPL), compared
to just 7.9 percent of income for a worker earning $102,080 (800 percent of FPL). 38
There are many options for more equitably distributing the financial burden of paying for
health care. For example, if a payroll tax were used to replace employer and employee
based financing, lower income employees would pay the same percentage of income as
upper income employees, rather than a much higher percentage as in the status quo.
However, attention is needed to assure that Californians receiving Medi-Cal or subsidized
coverage through Covered California are not made worse off financially under UF. The
expected effects on Californians with low income will depend on the extent to which
equitable approaches are used. If a payroll tax were used, for example, to raise part of the
revenue needed to support UF, employees who work for firms that do not now offer
coverage could see a decline in wages to compensate for the new payroll tax. If a sales tax
or gross receipts tax were used to raise part of the revenue, prices for goods and services
purchased by low-income workers would be expected to increase. Tax rebates or other
measures could be taken to mitigate any potential negative effects on Californians currently
with Medi-Cal and Covered California coverage. The state might also consider requiring that
employers pass through any savings from no longer providing job-based coverage to
workers.
38
In considering the advantages and disadvantages of alternative revenue sources, the
effects on Californians' federal income tax liability should be considered. As an illustration,
38 See presentation to the Commission on financing considerations on November 17, 2021.Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
suppose that employers no longer paid for employees' health insurance, and the
mechanism to repurpose the non-federal amount of current spending on health care to
support Unified Financing were accomplished through a combination of a gross receipts tax
and an increase in California income tax rates. In that scenario, we would expect, in the
long run, employee wages to increase by the amount that employers previously contributed
to health insurance. (If the state were to require that employers increase wages by the
amount that employers were previously contributing to health insurance, this result would be
achieved more quickly.) However, absent a change in federal tax policy, increased wages
would lead to increased federal income tax revenues; the federal government would receive
a windfall; and Californians would be, on average, worse off. For example, suppose that
wages increased by $100 billion annually because California employers no longer paid
directly for employees' health insurance, and that the combination of a gross receipts tax
and income tax raised close to $100 billion. Federal income tax revenue would increase by
more than $20 billion, and after Californians paid the increased income tax and increased
prices as a result of the gross receipts tax, Californians would be approximately $20 billion
per year worse off. California could attempt to persuade the federal government to return
the $20 billion in increased income tax revenues to the state, which is likely to be difficult.
Similarly, if a payroll tax were used to replace much or all of the money that employers and
employees currently pay for employees' health insurance, there would be significant tax
advantages to fashioning this as an entirely employer-paid payroll tax, rather than dividing
responsibility between the employer and employee. In the status quo, employer payments
for health insurance at firms that offer coverage average approximately 10% of payroll, and
employee payments average 2% of payroll. Federal corporate income tax law treats the
employer payments for health insurance as a legitimate cost of doing business, and those
payments reduce corporate profits. Federal individual income tax law excludes the
employee payments for health insurance from the employee's taxable income. Under
current federal law, if the employer were to pay a payroll tax and the employee were to pay
a percentage of wages to support Unified Financing, the employee payment would be
considered part of the employee's taxable income, and federal income tax revenues would
increase. California could attempt to persuade Congress to change tax law to exclude from
taxable income an employee-paid payroll tax of this nature. However, absent a change in
federal income tax law, if a payroll tax were used to fund significant portions of Unified
Financing, there are strong federal tax advantages for having the payroll tax be paid entirely
by employers rather than paid in part by employees.
In considering the advantages and disadvantages of alternative funding sources, the effects
on the competitiveness of California industry should also be considered. Some have raised
concerns that the amount of non-federal funding needed to support Unified Financing will
make California a less attractive place to do business, and hurt the California economy.
These concerns need to be taken seriously. However, it seems likely that many methods of
repurposing the non-federal amount currently spent on health care to support Unified
Financing will make California a more attractive, not less attractive, place to do business.
Suppose, for example, employer payments for health insurance were replaced with a payroll
tax, and suppose, as expected, that the payroll tax rate remained constant over time in
39Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
California, while the fraction of payroll that employers pay for health insurance in other
states continues to increase. In that scenario, California would become a more attractive
place to do business.
Stability Over Time
A major concern often voiced about unified financing is that it will not provide stability over
time. Two concerns are often mentioned, the first of which involves short term volatility. In a
recession, revenues will drop, and the UF authority may be forced to impose painful and
severe cuts. Alternatively, if health care needs increase rapidly (for example, as a result of a
pandemic), revenues will not be available to support those needs. In the absence of being
able to borrow money to cover short-term shortfalls, it is important for the UF authority to
have a substantial reserve fund to cover short run revenue reductions or spending
increases. In the estimates provided above, the consulting team assumed that a reserve
fund approximately equal to 20 percent of state-based spending would be created, with
some variation between options. The cost of creating that fund is built into the estimates.
The second, perhaps larger, concern is about longer-term stability. In the status quo, the
cost of employer sponsored insurance and out-of-pocket costs for households have been
increasing more quickly than workers' wages or productivity, and are expected to continue
to do so in the future. In the status quo, the 'effective' payroll tax – that is, the percentage of
wages that employers and employees pay for employer sponsored insurance - has been
increasing over time, and is expected to continue to increase over the next decade. If health
spending continues to increase more quickly than the rest of the economy, then tax rates
would need to increase over time, which would be politically difficult to sustain.
Two major factors affect how much non-federal funding is needed over time: (1) the rate of
growth of health care costs, and (2) the rate of growth of federal payments:
Under the assumptions that health care costs grow at the status quo, and non-federal
funding increases at the rate of growth of GDP, the $207 billion in non-federal
funding in Year 1 would grow to $242 billion, in 2022 dollars, in 2031 (Figure 5).
If health care costs grow under UF at the rate of growth of GDP (which would be
substantially more slowly than projected under status quo fragmented financing), and
federal government payments grow at the same rate as projected under fragmented
financing, the amount of non-federal funding needed to support UF in 2031 would fall
to $193 billion (in 2022 dollars), substantially less than the projected $242 billion if
non-federal funding grows at the rate of growth of GDP. The surplus could be used in
a variety of ways, including greater investments in the social drivers of health,
building up a larger reserve fund, or reducing tax rates. If health spending grows at
NHE minus 0.5%, the projected 2031 surplus would be smaller – $19 billion - but still
substantial.
A likely scenario is that the federal government would insist on capturing some or all of the
savings created by slowing the cost growth under UF. If the federal government captured all
40Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
of the savings generated by a lower rate of growth of health spending, an $18 billion surplus
would be expected in 2031 in the scenario in which health spending grows at GDP, and
virtually breakeven if health spending grows at NHE minus 0.5%.39 In this last scenario, in
which the federal government captures all of its share of the savings, and health spending
slows by 'only' 0.5% per year, there is little room for error. This result demonstrates that
stability of funding needed to support UF depends on both reducing the rate of health
spending growth and a strong and enforceable agreement with the federal government that
assures an adequate rate of growth in federal payments.
Under the scenario in which expenditures grow by CMS-projected NHE growth rates minus
0.5%, and the federal government captures their portion of the savings generated by this
lower growth rate, the estimated cumulative federal savings over the 2022 to 2031 period
would be $55 billion.40 The projected federal savings would be an important input in
discussions with the federal government about the role of Medicare and Medicaid in unified
financing in California.
39 In all the scenarios modelled, the consulting team assumed that Year 1 federal payments would be at the
status quo level, and that, even if UF created Year 1 savings, that the federal government would not receive a
share of those savings. In part, this assumption is based on the practical reality that it is likely to be very
difficult, if not impossible, to measure with any precision the extent to which aggregate spending in California
in year 1 is different from what would have been expected under the status quo.
40 The calculations supporting the $55 billion estimate are shown in the supporting spreadsheet, available at
https://www.chhs.ca.gov/healthycaforall/#analytic-findings
41Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Figure 5: UF expenditures by source compared to projected revenues, 2031 (2022$)
(Assumes non-federal funding increases at the rate of growth of GDP)
Projected
non-federal
funds
repurposed
under UF
$242 billion
$587 billion
$296
$193
$624 billion
$296
$223
$587 billion
$266
$224
$624 billion
$284
$235
GDP,
NHE-0.5%,
GDP,
NHE-0.5%,
state captures all state captures all feds captures their feds captures their
savings
savings
savings
savings
UF scenarios are with no cost sharing and no LTSS expansion 41
42
■ Other spending
■State and local
■Federal
Remaining
expenditures to be
covered by non-
federal funds
repurposed under UF
Estimated Effects of Unified Financing on Equity, Health, and Other Outcomes
Unified financing would create universal coverage, filling the gap for the one in ten
Californians under age 65 who lack insurance in our current system. Universal coverage is
critical to improving equity in our health care system given that undocumented Californians,
Latinos, and Californians with income at or below twice the federal poverty level are among
the groups most likely to lack insurance in our current system. The consulting team
estimated that universal coverage would save 4,000 or more lives annually.42 The impact of
universal coverage could be attained through UF or through other policy actions. For
example, as described further under Priority Actions and Next Steps, Governor Newsom's
2022-23 budget proposes expanding Medi-Cal to all income eligible Californians and, when
fully implemented, would bring California much closer to universal coverage.
Expansion of coverage and elimination of underinsurance would result in the vast majority
of Californians having a usual source of care under UF, compared to our current system in
which 11 percent of insured Californians and 52 percent of uninsured Californians lack a
usual source of care. Furthermore, UF would result in approximately one million more
Californians having at least one doctor visit annually and would greatly reduce the number
41 In other scenarios the non-federal funds that would be needed to support UF in the first year of UF are
shown in Figure 4, and the projected revenues in 2031 (increasing at the rate of growth of GDP) will change
commensurately. However, the main result of the analysis that the fraction of gross state product that would
need to be used to support UF could remain stable (or potentially decline) if health spending grows by at least
0.5% less under UF than in baseline - remains unchanged.
42 See presentation to the Commission on Unified Financing: Potential Effects and Design Options on May 21,
2021.Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
of Californians who avoid or delay care due to cost. The expansion of adult dental coverage
would support better and more equitable oral health.
UF, by eliminating the distinctions among Medi-Cal, employer-sponsored insurance,
Medicare, non-group coverage, and the uninsured, would also lead to a substantial increase
in equity in how care is delivered. While access to care for residents of lower income areas
would, in the first year of UF, still likely be inferior to access for higher income areas, no
longer would physicians, hospitals, or other health care providers have a financial incentive
to avoid providing care to low-income Californians, or racial and ethnic minority populations.
Well-crafted payment systems and accountability mechanisms would, over time,
substantially improve access to care for disadvantaged Californians.
UF, by creating a simpler and more uniform system of coverage and payment for patients
and for health care providers, and by aligning incentives in a way that the status quo
fragmented financing system cannot, has the potential to encourage health care providers
and health systems to focus on improvements in population health, on investments in
primary care and prevention, and on reduction in disparities. In the current fragmented
financing system, even the largely non-profit hospitals in California focus on increasing their
financial margins and growth strategies to generate surpluses and guard against
uncertainty. Under UF, revenue streams could be made less uncertain through payment
approaches such as global budgets, allowing health systems to shift focus from revenue
maximizing strategies to strategies that maximize population health and reduce disparities.
Under the current fragmented financing system, providers primarily serving more vulnerable
populations, such as Medi-Cal beneficiaries and the uninsured, typically operate on lower
revenue streams than those with large proportions of commercially insured patients. Under
UF, these providers would significantly benefit through equitable payment arrangements.
As discussed extensively at Commission meetings, the extent to which UF realizes this
potential is dependent on governance structures, payment systems, and accountability
mechanisms. Similarly, UF has the potential to facilitate a pivot to invest in the social drivers
of health. The extent to which this potential will be realized depends on many design
decisions. However, virtually all commissioners agreed that addressing social drivers of
health that compromise health status holds great potential yet noted that the health care
system should do this not in isolation but in coordination with other sectors.
The benefits of UF would also extend beyond improved equity and health. For example, one
in four Californians reported problems paying medical bills in late 2021, and the rate was
even higher among Californians with income under twice the poverty level and Latino and
Black adults. 43 Universal coverage and the elimination of underinsurance under UF would
improve financial security as fewer Californians having problems paying medical bills. As
another example, patients would spend less work and personal time navigating provider
systems and dealing with health insurance companies as a result of administrative
simplification.
43 California HealthCare Foundation. 2022. The 2022 CHCF California Health
Policy Survey. https://www.chcf.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/CHCF2022CAHealthPolicySurvey.pdf
43Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Of particular consequence, the inclusion of LTSS as covered services under UF would
improve the lives of millions of caregiving families. 44 Women - particularly Black,
Indigenous, Latino, and Asian-American women - provide a disproportionately large share
of this care, often while simultaneously caring for children and working outside of the home.
Households of color are more likely than white households to be multi-generational, which
may indicate these families are more likely to provide unpaid caregiving across the
generations. As rewarding as this work may be, the time needed to care for a loved one can
result in financial hardship and a decrease in lifelong Social Security earnings, which can
continue the cycle of poverty and debt for low-income households. The emotional and
physical stress of caregiving can also lead to poor health outcomes for the family caregiver.
With their loved ones benefitting from LTSS as covered services, caregivers, particularly
women of color, would have greater opportunity to fulfil their own goals and dreams rather
than sacrifice on behalf of their loved ones.
Analytic Findings: Summary of Potential Benefits
Analytic work done in connection with the Commission process illuminated how California
and Californians would be better off under UF. Across the entire state, as described above,
a less fragmented system of financing and organizing health care would reduce duplication
of effort and administrative burden and would provide greater accountability for equitable
outcomes. The implications of UF for particular groups of potential beneficiaries are
summarized in Table 5 below.
44 Supporting caregiving for adults, like caregiving for children, is essential for family life, the economy, and a
California for all ages. Across California, almost five million family caregivers help their parents, spouses, and
friends who need assistance with everyday tasks to live well in their homes and communities. Of these, almost
1.7 million are caring for someone with Alzheimer's Disease or dementia, usually with little support or training.
This constitutes about 4 billion hours of unpaid time, valued at $63 billion, each year. See California's Master
Plan for Aging, January 2021.
44Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Table 5: UF Benefits and Beneficiaries
Who Benefits? | Through What Mechanism?
Employers
Elimination of employer
health benefit
procurement role
Individual
Californians
Health Care
Providers
●
Universal coverage (which
can be achieved under UF
or via other policy routes)
Delivery system changes
that increase quality,
accessibility and equity
More equitable financing
Single set of rules for
payment, quality, other
outcomes
How Do They Benefit?
Reduced administrative burden
Ability to focus on their areas of
expertise and business goals rather
than the health coverage needs of
employees
Improved access to care and reduced
cost-sharing
Expanded benefits (e.g. dental, LTSS)
● Reduced uncertainty and worry
●
Better health outcomes
Fewer disparities and more equitable
care
Financial burden on households is
more predictable and better aligns
with ability to pay
Reduced administrative burden and
greater opportunity to focus on patient
care
● More equitable and consistent
payment
Decisions and Actions Needed to Achieve Unified Financing
As described in more detail in the Commission's Environmental Analysis, 45 key actions will
demonstrate clear progress toward UF. The state will need clarity regarding federal
commitments in order to include federal Medicare and Medicaid funds within the state UF
system and to maintain a sustainable rate of growth for redirected federal funds. To
successfully engage the federal government on the threshold issue of federal permissions
and federal funding, the state will need to develop and refine a proposal for UF that finalizes
design decisions and implementation steps that achieve goals of universality, improved
equity, affordability, access and quality, while providing confidence that UF will meet federal
legal requirements. The California Legislature will likely need to enact legislation specifying
how UF will be implemented and funded. California voters may need to approve
constitutional amendments to modify limits on state appropriations (for further discussion,
see the section on Financing). Careful planning and political will, together with effective
collaboration with the federal government, will be needed to achieve UF.
45 Healthy California for All Commission, An Environmental Analysis of Health Care Delivery, Coverage, and
Financing in California, August 2020. See in particular pages 78-81.
45Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
A statewide UF system will require decisions and actions along many dimensions. Through
Commission deliberations and via survey input, commissioners discussed many issues
related to UF design and offered valuable perspectives on the implications of alternative
approaches. Nevertheless, greater detail will need to be specified as California moves to
implement UF. This section highlights many of the decisions and actions that will be
required to establish UF. Where Commission discussions, input from commissioner surveys,
and/or the consulting team's analysis pointed to preferred approaches or illuminated
important trade-offs, those are also briefly described.
Design
Eligibility and Enrollment
A foundational premise for the work of the Commission has been that the UF system will be
universal and will apply to all Californians. In their deliberations, many commissioners have
expressed the intention that all Californians will be included under UF by virtue of state
residence, with no distinctions based on their federal immigration status, and no
commissioners have disagreed with that assertion. Residency criteria might include physical
presence in the state of a defined duration, location of employer or employment within
California, and/or family relationships (e.g., adoption by or marriage to a California resident).
Qualification for certain benefits, such as comprehensive LTSS coverage, that are not
available in other states might be subject to additional requirements. As with many of the
design decisions that California will need to make on its way to UF, tradeoffs would need to
be navigated, so that California's program is indeed welcoming and available to all residents
yet not so easily accessed that people from outside California take advantage of the
program, driving up its cost.
Agreements negotiated with the federal government to redirect federal Medicare and
Medicaid funds and ACA premium subsidies to a state unified financing pool might require
that information about Californians' eligibility for one or more of those programs be tracked
after UF implementation. Data reporting, for example, on federally defined eligibility
categories for public programs or federally required data reporting on quality measures
could add administrative complexity that might influence California's ultimate design
decisions.
Policies will be needed concerning California residents who require health care when they
are not in the state, including determining when a California resident has permanently
moved out of state and is no longer eligible for coverage; coverage for dependents who live
out of state; and coverage for residents who live for an extended period of time in another
state or country.
46Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Covered Benefits and Services
Although the Commission did not devote much public meeting time to discussing covered
benefits and services or cost-sharing, the tacit assumption was that benefits under UF will
be comprehensive.
Benefits at levels comparable to those provided today under Medi-Cal were sometimes
posited. Commissioners encouraged inclusion of comprehensive vision and dental services
as well. At several points in the process commissioners acknowledged that medical
necessity criteria should apply, as they are today in both private and public health insurance
plans. While Commission process did not spend much public meeting time on the role of
utilization management, such as prior authorization, all Commissioners agreed, as shown in
the November 2021 survey summary, that individuals should be encouraged to select a
primary care provider to coordinate their care. Commissioner Comsti, in particular,
advocated for a system whereby consumers could access care without prior authorization or
other utilization management techniques, such as step therapy. At the February, 23, 2022
meeting, Commissioner Sandra Hernandez stated that if some sort of triage is required to
manage resources under UF, it is important for primary care providers to be in the position
of making health care decisions that allow them to look across the entirety of each patient's
needs. Both views are departures from some of the more stringent forms of utilization
management used within the current health care system, where narrow networks and plan
incentives to manage costs may limit access to needed care. Since the tradeoffs associated
with utilization management were not fully examined, any future design of the UF system
will need to consider mechanisms to ensure appropriate care and management of costs.
There was broad agreement among commissioners that the inclusion of comprehensive
coverage for long-term services and supports (LTSS) was important to advance access,
equity, and quality outcomes. In particular, several commissioners highlighted the hidden
costs and consequences of the lack of access to LTSS today, including productivity
implications and opportunity costs associated with family members leaving the workforce in
order to take care of loved ones and the disproportionate stress and financial impact that
family caregiving places on Californians with lower incomes. Given the absence of
widespread, comprehensive LTSS coverage in the U.S. today, the Commission discussion
acknowledged some uncertainty about LTSS benefit structure and cost implications.
Nevertheless, commissioners concluded that under UF, LTSS benefits should be covered
and coordinated with other health care and social services.
Via the December 2021 survey, all responding commissioners "agreed" or "agreed with
slight modifications” to the following statements regarding benefits:
●
Dental, vision and hearing services should be included among the benefits covered
through a unified financing system
Behavioral health services (that is, services to address mental health and substance
use disorders) should be included among the benefits covered through a unified
financing system
47Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
Comprehensive long-term services and supports should be among the benefits
covered through a unified financing system
Patient Cost-Sharing
Commissioner discussions on cost-sharing identified two potential goals for imposing even a
modest level of cost-sharing: (1) to reduce the costs of financing the UF system and (2) to
reduce the total cost of care by dissuading use of care that provides little or no patient
benefit. In designing and implementing cost-sharing, the UF authority should be clear about
what the goal is of a given cost sharing approach.
The consulting team modeled two different patient cost-sharing approaches, as described
above in the Analytic Findings section. As discussions advance regarding UF design, the
potential impact of different cost-sharing arrangements on the use of necessary and
unnecessary services, the administrative burden that accompanies copayment collection,
and the potential for generating revenue should all be considered. As shown in the
November 2021 presentation to the Commission, the estimated revenue required in a
scenario with income-related cost sharing is approximately $40 billion less than in a
scenario with no cost sharing - $168 billion would need to be repurposed from the non-
federal amount currently spent on health care in a scenario with income-related cost
sharing, compared to $207 billion that would need to be repurposed from the non-federal
amount currently spent on health care in a scenario with no cost sharing.46 However, in a
scenario with income-related cost sharing consumers will pay $20 billion more in out-of-
pocket payments than in a scenario with no cost sharing.
Some commissioners expressed concern about the effects of out-of-pocket payments on
access to beneficial care, as well as concerns about the administrative costs of
implementing income-related cost sharing. Evidence from the RAND Health Insurance
Experiment (HIE) showed that patients are not good at distinguishing care that is likely to be
effective from care that is likely ineffective, and that cost sharing results in reductions in both
types of care.47 However, the RAND HIE also found that with the exception of low income
patients, cost sharing did not result in measurable reductions in health status. As described
above, in the assumptions made by the consulting team for one analytic scenario, patients
in families with incomes below 138% of the Federal Poverty Level would not face any cost
sharing, and those in families between 138% and 400% of the Federal Poverty Level would
pay an average of 6% of total expenditures, with out-of-pocket liability likely capped at
approximately $1,000 per year for an individual and $2,000 for a family.
Some commissioners believed that no patient cost-sharing was appropriate; others advised
that any cost-sharing should be limited so that access to needed care is not impeded.
Several commissioners commented that cost-sharing should exempt those with low
46 Both estimates assume direct payment to providers and without expansion of LTSS services (slide 20 from
November presentation to Commissioners.)
47 RAND Corporation. "The Health Insurance experiment: A Classic RAND Study Speaks to the Current Health Care
Reform Debate." Research Brief, RAND Health (2006). https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/ RB9174.html
48Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
incomes but were open to limited cost-sharing if progressively structured with respect to
individual or household income. In the December survey, all but one commissioner
"agreed" or "agreed with slight modification" to the following statements regarding cost-
sharing:
The decision to impose patient cost-sharing should balance considerations of equity,
appropriate use of health care services, administrative burden, and implications for
revenue needs.
Copayments or coinsurance, if any, should reflect individuals' and households' ability
to pay.
The December survey elicited additional responses related to cost-sharing; interested
readers are encouraged to review the summary for verbatim commissioner comments. 48
Cost-sharing was also discussed at the February 23, 2022 meeting. At that meeting
Commissioner Hsiao expressed the view that an “ideal" single payer or unified financing
health system would have no cost sharing. He described reasons to consider using cost
sharing: in order to contribute to program financial feasibility; in order to reduce unnecessary
use of medical services; or as a tool for managing use of health care services when supplies
are limited. Throughout that discussion, most commissioners favored a system with no cost
sharing; those who expressed guarded interest in modest cost-sharing acknowledged
tradeoffs and the need for thoughtful design that spares, to the greatest extent possible,
those with low incomes and high health care needs. For example, how any cost-sharing is
structured makes a difference. Fixed dollar copayments are more readily understood by
consumers than deductibles and coinsurance. Further, achieving the level of actuarial value
contemplated under UF could be done in various ways, some of which would have a
disproportionate impact on the sick.
Provider Payment
Decisions about how and how much health care providers will be paid are crucial for
understanding how and how well UF will work. Commissioners were in strong support of the
proposition that payment policy is one of the key levers that can be used in UF to achieve
the goals of increasing access and improving equity, efficiency, quality of care, and health
outcomes.
Institutional Providers
Maryland's experience with the country's only all-payer rate setting program for hospital
services, in place since the 1970s, offers an important reference point for California. Over
time, Maryland's rate setting model that limited the growth of inpatient hospital costs for
each hospital stay became less effective, resulting in increases in the volume of hospital
services provided and the state having one of the nation's highest per capita Medicare
hospital costs. In 2014, Maryland significantly reformed its approach for paying hospitals for
48 See December 2021 survey summary available through the February 23, 2022 meeting materials at the
Healthy California for All web page.
49Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
each service to a Total Cost of Care (TCOC) model.49 The TCOC model has the following
components:1) prospective global budgets across all payers for hospitals; 2) incentives to
reduce total costs of care, overall and for specific episodes of care; 3) waivers allowing
hospitals to align incentives with other providers; and 4) the Maryland Primary Care
Program to support practices in transforming care.
As described by Joshua Sharfstein in his October 11, 2021 presentation to the Commission
on the Maryland global budgeting system, global budgets for hospitals and other institutions
have a variety of advantages over fee-for-service payment. Most importantly, hospitals that
are guaranteed revenue through a global budget can focus on reducing preventable
admissions by implementing strategies to prioritize primary care, including supporting follow-
up after discharge and care coordination, and by investments to improve community health.
The status quo of fee-for-service hospital financing encourages hospitals to maximize
revenue by investing in high margin/high technology areas, and in areas that will be
attractive to privately insured patients.5⁰ In the TCOC model, the Maryland Primary Care
Program is structured to incentivize primary care providers in Maryland to offer advanced
primary care services to their patients and to encourage practices to reduce the
hospitalization rate and improve the quality of care for their attributed Medicare
beneficiaries, among other quality and utilization-focused improvements.
Sharfstein notes that hospital global budgets could, at least in Year 1 of UF, be based on
the historical revenues for each hospital. Alternatively, the Year 1 budget could be based on
historical costs at each hospital, which are on average about 4% less annually, or $4 billion,
than hospital revenues.51 If global budgets are based on historical costs, some allowance
would be needed to accommodate capital investments to support new technology and
replacement of facilities.
A variety of decisions will be needed about how global budgets would be implemented, with
the most consequential ones described below:
Volume Changes: How, if at all, will the budget adjust to changes in volume? As
described above, one of the main advantages of global budgets is that they allow
hospitals to focus on improving community health, and not on maximizing volume.
However, if there are substantial volume decreases because a hospital closes a
service, or substantial increases because a neighboring hospital closes, or shifts
because a large medical group realigns its affiliation, then most would agree that a
hospital's budget would need to be adjusted. A related question is whether fixed
4⁹ Maryland Total Cost of Care Model. https://innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/md-tccm
5⁰ Sharfstein, J. M. (2016). Global budgets for rural hospitals. The Milbank Quarterly, 94(2), 255; Rajkumar, R.,
Patel, A., Murphy, K., Colmers, J. M., Blum, J. D., Conway, P. H., & Sharfstein, J. M. (2014). Maryland's all-
payer approach to delivery-system reform. The New England Journal of Medicine, 370(6), 493-495; and
Sharfstein, J. M., Gerovich, S., Moriarty, E., & Chin, D. (2017). An emerging approach to payment reform: all-
payer global budgets for large safety-net hospital systems. The Commonwealth Fund.
51 This average is based on the five-year period from 2014 to 2019, based on data from
https://data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/hospital-annual-financial-data-selected-data-pivot-tables. Note average
operating margin declined to 0.7% in 2020 due to impacts from the pandemic.
50Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
global budgets that do not adjust for volume changes give hospitals incentives to
reduce the availability of high cost services, and to stint on beneficial care.
Utilization Changes: How much, if at all, should hospital budgets be adjusted to
accommodate the expected increase in utilization as a result of eliminating
uninsurance and underinsurance?
Capital Infrastructure: What sort of approval process, if any, will be needed for
major capital investment decisions, and how, if at all, should global budgets be
adjusted for capital investments?
Equality Adjustments: How, and how quickly, should resources be moved from the
"haves" to the "have not" hospitals that currently vary in payer mix, negotiating
leverage with payers and payment rates. For example, in the Los Angeles region
alone, there are historically high priced hospitals that serve predominantly affluent
populations in the west side of the county to financially weaker hospitals in other
parts of the county that serve predominantly low-income people. 52
Outpatient Providers
As discussed by commissioners, for physicians, mid-level practitioners, and other non-
institutional providers, the UF authority would either set or negotiate fee-for-service based
payment rates. Under the consulting team's scenario for direct payments under UF,
aggregate payments to physicians would be equal to the weighted average of current Medi-
Cal, Medicare, and ESI payments, minus estimated reductions in costs due to reduced
billing and insurance related costs. One implication of UF is that physicians whose patients
are currently primarily covered by private insurance will receive less revenue under UF than
they do under the status quo, while physicians whose patients are primarily insured by
Medicare or Medi-Cal will receive an increase in revenue. The analysis assumes that,
because the UF system will be the only source of third party payment, all California
physicians and other health care providers will participate in the UF system.
●
In addition to the inevitable redistribution of revenue, a variety of policy decisions are
needed about physician payment, such as:
Should payment for primary care be increased from status quo levels, and/or should
payment for specialists be decreased? These decisions influence the ratio of primary
care physicians to specialists, with implications for access, cost, quality and equity.
Such policy decisions deserve a full evaluation.
How could payment be used to increase the supply of physician services in
underserved areas - both in low income areas of major metropolitan areas, as well
as in the Central Valley and other areas of the state where physicians are in short
supply?
Commissioner Comsti suggested that physicians and/or medical groups could choose to be
paid a salary, rather than receive fee-for-service payment. Since this approach would be a
52 California Health Care Foundation. 2017. Los Angeles: Haves and Have Nots Lead to a Divided System.
https://www.chcf.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/PDF-AlmanacRegMktBriefLA09.pdf
51Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
substantial departure from current practice, many design decisions would need to be made
in order to implement such an approach, including 53:
●
●
How would the level of salary be determined? For example, Commissioner Comsti
suggested existing salary structures could be a starting point for negotiations, with
salaries adjusted based on factors such as years of practice, specialty, and serving a
medically underserved area.
For administrative simplification, would a medical group be limited to choosing only
one approach (fee-for-service or salaries)? For physicians in independent practice,
would they engage with the UF authority directly?
Would the costs of operating the physician's office - including the cost of rent,
equipment, utilities, and salaries for nurses and office staff - be paid by the
physician or by the UF authority? If the former, how would the UF authority determine
how big an allowance to provide each physician to cover those costs? If the latter,
how could the UF authority efficiently review and make such payments in an efficient
and responsible way?
What would a medical group or physician need to agree to do to receive the salary?
For example, would physicians commit to providing a certain number of hours of care
(including for full time or part-time physicians) or seeing a certain number of patients?
Given the size of California, how would the UF authority efficiently and effectively
monitor whether the physician was fulfilling the agreement? Monitoring and
compensation arrangements will need to handle a variety of scenarios, ranging from
physicians serving more patients who may deserve higher pay, to situations in which
physicians who receive upfront payments for care management or ancillary support
underperform in their obligations.
How would compensation arrangements affect California's ability to attract and retain
physicians?
Purchasing Arrangements and Role, if any, for Intermediaries
One of the major decisions to be made in designing a UF system is whether payments will
be made directly from the UF authority to hospitals, physicians, and other health care
providers, or whether capitated payments will be made to health plans or health systems,
which in turn make payments to providers. Commissioners engaged in several robust
discussions on this question. Most commissioners supported capitated payments, with
some remarking that the major advantage is that capitation provides health care providers
and organizations the resources to coordinate care in order to provide high quality care and
improve population health.
Commissioners supporting the direct payment approach argued that any system in which
medical groups are paid by risk-based capitation would inevitably lead to administrative
53 Many physicians working in large medical groups are currently paid by salary, but the process by which a
medical group negotiates physician salaries, monitors physician performance, and provides the physical and
staff infrastructure for the physician's office is entirely different from a scenario in which a Unified Financing
authority would perform these functions.
52Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
waste and provide incentives to stint on needed care, engage in unproductive efforts to
attract enrollees who are in relatively good health and avoid patients most in need of care.
These divergent views were not resolved during the Commission process.
Each approach has advantages, but also raises significant concerns.
Direct Payment Approach
Direct payment would result in lower billing and insurance-related costs for physicians,
hospitals, and other health care providers relative to a system that uses health plans or
health systems as intermediaries. Similarly, the costs of administering a direct payment
system would be less than the costs of administering a system that uses plans or systems
as intermediaries. Under the direct payment approach, physicians (at least those paid by
fee-for-service) would not have any financial incentive to stint on needed care. (Hospitals
receiving revenues determined by a global budget would have an incentive to stint, although
this incentive could be attenuated if budgets are adjusted for volume.) A direct payment
approach is also more compatible with patients being able to receive care from any
provider, a UF design feature that some commissioners and members of the public
associate with a "pure" single-payer approach and that some but not all commissioners
prioritize.
Notwithstanding these benefits of a direct payment system, many commissioners expressed
significant concerns about moving to a direct payment approach. As described in the
Environmental Report, 60 percent of the payments to medical groups for Californians
covered by Medicare or private insurance are made through capitation, with the percentage
likely higher for Medi-Cal beneficiaries. Analysis conducted by the Integrated Healthcare
Association suggests that health care utilization is lower for patients cared for by medical
groups paid through capitation, and performance on standard quality of care measures is
higher. 54 Commissioners supporting the use of risk-based capitation emphasized that
capitation can help to create integrated systems of care, particularly to serve the needs of
patients with complex care needs, and noted the difficulty of arranging well-coordinated
services in a direct payment approach. These commissioners also argued that, in an
environment in which patients choose among groups to enroll, medical groups receiving
risk-based capitation would work at reducing the provision of low-value care, better align the
number and types of physicians and other resources with the needs of enrolled patients,
improve the quality and timeliness of care, and encourage available resources to be used to
maximize population health.
Some commissioners asserted that California's long-standing reliance on health plans as
intermediaries, including within Medi-Cal, reflected an intentional choice to delegate some of
the responsibility for maintaining access and assessing appropriateness of care to entities
other than a central, statewide authority. These commissioners noted that, given the sheer
54
Integrated Healthcare Association, California Regional Health Care Cost & Quality Atlas, In Search of Value:
How Well Do Commercial HMOs and PPOs Deliver?
53Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
size and geographic diversity of California, health plans have been used because their
existing infrastructure and relationships with providers allow them to more efficiently
coordinate care. Some commissioners remarked that the direct payment approach would
run counter to the trend of the Medi-Cal program increasingly delegating more
responsibilities to managed care. This includes the mandatory enrollment of seniors and
persons with disabilities into managed care, the transition of Healthy Families Program
children into managed care, the Cal Medi-Connect (CMC) demonstration for dual eligible
beneficiaries, and the upcoming transition of CMC beneficiaries into enrollment in aligned
Dual Eligible Special Needs Plans (D-SNPs) and Medicaid managed care plans, also known
as Managed Long-Term Services and Supports (MLTSS), under the California Advancing
and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) waiver. 55
Continued but Reimagined Role for Health Plans and Health Systems
At several points in commissioner deliberations, the view was expressed that if health plans
or health systems were used as intermediaries under UF, the functions of those plans or
systems should be quite different than the functions of health plans under the status quo
fragmented financing. In the status quo, health plans administer a wide array of benefit
packages and copayment structures, and have multiple contracts with providers (typically,
separate contracts for Medicare, Medi-Cal, and ESI, and often multiple contracts for ESI). In
the status quo, with the partial exception of Kaiser, membership turnover is common,
caused by a myriad of factors such as gaining or losing employment, no longer qualifying for
dependent coverage, changes in the plans offered by an employer, gaining or losing Medi-
Cal coverage, or changes in availability or supplemental benefits offered by Medicare
Advantage plans.
Under UF, all health plans or systems would be required to offer the same set of benefits
and if copayments are used at all – the same copayment structure. Each plan or system
will have a single contract with contracted health care providers. As in Medicare Advantage,
maximum payment rates for out-of-network services would be set by the UF authority as
described above, although health plans or systems might negotiate other rates or forms of
payment (such as capitation) with providers. With permanent consumer eligibility and a
relatively stable landscape of plans and systems, each plan or system could anticipate a
much more stable pool of members from year-to-year. Uniform benefit packages, a uniform
data system, and the expectation of large and relatively stable membership would make
much more transparent the performance of plans or systems in assuring access to care,
reducing disparities, and improving population health outcomes.
Some commissioners also expressed interest in reimagining which organizations could play
some or all of the intermediary roles currently held by health plans or health systems. For
example, Commissioner Chin-Hansen raised the Program for All-Inclusive Care for the
Elderly (PACE) providers as examples of entities that receive capitated payments and are
55 The State will also require Medicaid managed care plans in all other counties in the state to establish D-
SNPs and offer aligned enrollment as of 2025.
54Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
held accountable for the well-being and clinical outcomes for people who would otherwise
require care in nursing homes. Commissioner Flocks suggested that community-based
organizations, unions, clinics, or nonprofits may be able to play an expanded role in care
coordination under UF. Commissioner Ross suggested a new type of intermediary called
Recovery and Equity Councils or Accountable Communities for Health, which would be
responsible for linking individuals with health-related social needs to community resources,
facilitating partnerships and alignment among and across organizations and sectors, and
addressing root causes of poor health, including structural racism at the community level.56
Commissioner Lee remarked on the importance of having "an organizer" in the health care
system that takes a comprehensive view and noted that this does not have to be the health
plan. Commissioner Lee indicated it is impractical to have 70,000 individual doctors and
their teams coordinate care given the complexity of consumers' needs, with many requiring
concurrent behavioral health treatment and inpatient and outpatient care for physical health
needs. Commissioner Lee suggested the State of California, acting in the interest of
consumers instead of corporate profits, could hold contracted intermediaries accountable for
performance on access, quality of care, and equity but will need reliable data in order to
send consistent signals to providers on payment and accountability.
In comments on an earlier draft, Commissioner Flocks observed that integrated health
systems are core to California care delivery. She encouraged "seeing if there's a way to
engineer payments that support [existing] models but do not involve the drawbacks of the
current system of payments or reliance on health plans as intermediaries." In other
comments she urged an end to "corporate profit-taking" under UF. Commissioner Wright
imagined building on existing health systems and perhaps adjusting the role of local Medi-
Cal initiatives to coordinate care. He too noted that care coordinators (discussed further
below) "would not be the for-profit insurance companies of today."
"57
Systems of Accountability for Access, Equity, Efficiency, Quality, and Outcomes
Whether California were to use the direct payment approach or intermediaries via health
plans or health systems, a consistent theme in commissioner discussions was that UF
should implement systems of accountability to assure improved access, equity, efficiency,
quality of care and health outcomes. Under systems of accountability, the UF authority will
need to answer key questions in order to transparently measure performance and take
action when necessary: (1) who is being held accountable? (2) who are they accountable
for? (3) what are they accountable for? and (4) what are the levers to assure accountability?
In discussing systems of accountability, Commissioner Scheffler noted that risk-based
capitated payments made at the organizational level provide the resources to provide high
quality care and improve population health via integrated delivery systems. Commissioner
Scheffler recommended that the UF Authority ought to create "health equity scores" for
56 Comments by Commissioner Robert Ross on Analytic Methods and Assumptions, August 2021.
57 See summary of commissioner comments on March 17 draft, available at https://www.chhs.ca.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2022/04/HCFA-Commission-March-Survey-Report-2022.pdf
55Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
plans and providers and that those with unacceptable scores on quality and equity should
receive reduced resources and/or payments. Commissioner Flocks also emphasized the
importance of the UF Authority having levers to distribute more health care resources to
providers in medically underserved areas experiencing inequities and health disparities,
often due to racism and biases. Commissioner Flocks noted that payment, including
additional upfront payments to providers, can be used to support such equity goals, even in
the absence of risk bearing intermediaries.
Invited speaker Dana Gelb Safran offered two policy approaches to acknowledge the
differential resources that may be required to achieve desired outcomes in
socioeconomically vulnerable populations.58 Safran emphasized that adjustments should be
made to payment, rather than lowering expectations for performance scores among more
at-risk populations. Under the first approach, payment adjustment would be applied
prospectively with increased upfront payments to providers who care for populations with
greater social risk in recognition of the extra resources required to care for these
populations. Under the second approach, the payment method would be applied through
performance incentive payments—establishing a multiplier such that those serving a
population with greater social risk would be rewarded more for achieving the same level of
performance as their peers serving a more advantaged population. Commissioner Comsti
raised concerns about limitations in risk adjustment methods and potential financial harm to
providers serving vulnerable populations in any system in which payment to providers is
contingent on measured performance.
Care Coordination
A conversation at the February 23, 2022 Commission meeting focused on the potential
need for an entity or entities that could assist in care coordination across the full continuum
of providers and services. As visualized in Figure 6, the premise of the conversation was
that under UF, a statewide authority would be responsible for core functions related to
establishing benefits, eligibility, and payments and ensuring transparency. Individual care
providers, physicians and hospitals would be responsible for excellent clinical care for the
individual patients they serve, and to report data on quality and access. In order to assure
that all Californians receive care that is well-coordinated and high quality, the discussion
explored how care coordination function in between those two levels could best be carried
out.
Commissioner Sandra Hernandez underlined the importance of data systems to share
information in real-time to support care coordination. Commissioner Pan noted that care
coordination was best conducted close to the point of care, but indicated that payment
levels and payment structures should allow health providers to direct resources in ways that
advance care coordination. Commissioner Baass encouraged a vision of coordination that
included both health care and social supports, particularly for vulnerable populations.
58 "Addressing Social Risk Factors In Value-Based Payment: Adjusting Payment Not Performance To Optimize
Outcomes and Fairness", Health Affairs Blog, April 19, 2021.
56Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Commissioner Comsti questioned the appropriateness of any corporate structure playing a
role in care delivery or coordination. Commissioner Wright encouraged commissioners to
imagine a future system in which coordinating entities competed to deliver the highest
quality care for people with complex conditions such as diabetes and heart disease. In
summary, the commission discussion noted care coordination is important and must be
done by some entity; that generally speaking, it was desirable to keep that role close to the
patient with most decisions guided by primary care providers; that accountability and
transparency are needed in order to assure that care is well-coordinated; and that it was
important to attend to population outcomes as well as individual health indicators.
Figure 6: Care Coordination and Care Delivery
Statewide UF Authority
Benefits
Eligibility
Establish payment rates
Data monitoring and transparency
Grievances and appeals
●
Care Coordinating Entity (ies)
Quality improvement
Care coordination across the full
continuum of providers and services
Population health improvement
Disparities reduction
Physicians, Institutions, Other
Health Care Providers
Clinical care for individual
patients
Data reporting
Greater Efficiency and Cost Containment
Many aspects of system design will influence total health care spending. For the system to
be sustainable over time, aggregate spending targets will need to be established and
achieved. Via the December survey, Commissioner Flocks offered the view that a key
precursor to legislative and/or voter approval of UF was demonstration that the UF system
would be sustainable. Through the same survey, 8 of 11 responding commissioners
indicated that to “Establish and implement a prospective per capita health care spending
target" would be a "very important” step on the path to UF and 4 commissioners said this
was among the top three “most important” steps. As described above in the Analytic
Findings section, UF provides both strong motivation and expanded levers to exert
spending discipline. The levers include: global budgeting for hospitals; purchasing power
over pharmaceuticals similar to that exerted by governments in other developed nations; the
ability to control prices paid to physicians and other non-institutional providers; substantial
reductions in administrative costs; enhanced ability to combat fraud and abuse; and,
potentially, strengthened incentives for medical groups to figure out how to deliver high
57Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
quality care efficiently. The nature of financing agreements and governance arrangements,
both discussed in more detail below, will play a crucial role in system sustainability.
In comments on an earlier draft, Commissioner Hsiao offered several cost containment
strategies to advance progress toward UF. These included:
1. Conducting research to estimate administrative burden of providers due to a multi-
payer health care system and potential administrative cost savings under UF;
2. Requiring hospitals and imaging laboratories to use standard cost accounting
methods;
3. Setting an annual prospective health expenditure benchmark for California with a
stated cap on the increase in health spending;
4. Establishing policies to control monopolistic pricing and high profits among health
plans and providers;
5. Reducing drug prices through purchaser alliance bargaining with pharmaceutical
companies;
6. Identifying and engaging firms with the expertise to identify claims fraud and
overbilling; and
7. Timely development of a uniform clinical record and statewide claims record
system.59
Care Delivery and Workforce
Many design decisions – including how provider payments are structured, how care
coordination is provided, how costs are managed, and many others – will influence how
care is delivered and the extent to which the ultimate goals of accessible, affordable,
equitable, high quality and universal care are achieved. Although the Commission charge
and its discussions did not go at length into the ways that care delivery would be enhanced
under UF, throughout the process many commissioners offered suggestions. For example,
Commissioner Antonia Hernandez urged that a new system rely on and fully support
community health centers and health clinics, particularly in underserved regions, because
they are well-equipped to meet Californians where they are with respectful, culturally
sensitive care. Commissioner Ross encouraged California's future system to learn from
experience under the California Accountable Health Care Initiative (CACHI) through which
regional and local partnerships extending far beyond traditional health care providers work
in concert to advance health equity.
60
59 The California Department of Health Care Access and Information is currently implementing a state all-
payers claims database, which is known as the Health Care Payments Data Program (HPD). It will begin
producing initial analytical reports after July 1, 2023.
60 https://cachi.org/
58Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Many commissioners reiterated the importance of investing in and supporting California's
future health care workforce. Current workforce gaps and recommendations for targeted
improvement strategies have been reviewed and discussed extensively by other bodies. 61
As California moves from the COVID-19 crisis to recovery, there are significant workforce
proposals currently underway, with critical implications for the health of Californians.62
Under a UF system, design features must prioritize workforce development in order to
achieve the Commission's vision of an improved health care system that is accessible,
affordable, equitable, high-quality, and universal. The need to improve the representation of
diversity within the workforce was elevated frequently throughout the Commission process.
The Community Engagement process also highlighted that people in communities that have
been marginalized or excluded as a result of systemic racism or other biases - people of
color, immigrants, LGBTQ+ people, people who speak languages other than English, and
people with disabilities – report stigmatizing and disrespectful treatment when they access
care and often experience worse health outcomes. Through its design decisions, the UF
system will need to grapple with these issues and create accessible opportunities to recruit,
train, hire and advance an ethnically and culturally inclusive health and human services
workforce. Strategies may include payments that adjust for equity, such that providers
serving more socioeconomically vulnerable populations receive upfront payments or higher
payment to achieve the desired outcomes. 63
Adding LTSS as covered services will increase demand among Californians eligible for
these services. Recruiting, training and organizing this workforce will take time and
considerable effort. It also poses an important opportunity to improve the structure of these
services and ensure we provide different models of LTSS based on cultural needs across
California.
Financing
Obtaining Federal Government Permissions and Funding
UF cannot be accomplished in California without federal support. Commissioners disagreed
about whether federal participation in UF could be accomplished through existing Medicare,
Medicaid, and ACA waiver authority, or whether changes in federal law would be required.
In a discussion on the state/federal relationship and financing mechanisms at the
September 23, 2021 meeting, Commissioner Carmen Comsti offered the view that
California could seamlessly integrate federal programs into a state single payer or unified
financing system via existing federal waivers - and that no changes are needed in federal
6¹ See, for example, the following reports: Future of Work Report; Quality Jobs Are Essential: California's
Direct Care Workforce and the Master Plan for Aging; Master Plan on Early Learning and Care; Building an
Inclusive Health Workforce in California: A Statewide Policy Agenda
62 The workforce proposals are described in the section, Steps on the Path to Unified Financing under State
Authority.
63 For more discussion, see the section, Systems of Accountability for Access, Equity, Efficiency, Quality, and
Outcomes.
59Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
law. At the same meeting, Commissioner Andy Schneider argued that the federal Secretary
of Health and Human Services has no authority, by waiver or otherwise, to transfer federal
Medicare or Medicaid funds to a state for a unified financing system. In Commissioner
Schneider's view, if California wants to use federal Medicare and Medicaid funds as part of
a unified financing system, including single payer, it will need to persuade the Congress and
the President to change federal law.64
Some commissioners noted that even if a favorable agreement with the federal government
is reached on Year 1 financing and on the rate of growth of federal payments over time,
there is risk that the federal government could change the terms of that agreement in the
future, (e.g., a different federal Administration or changes in federal law), and potentially
leave California to shoulder an increasing financial burden. California policymakers and
voters would need to assess the level of risk posed by potential future federal action, and
whether that level of risk is acceptable. That risk would be higher if UF were implemented by
an HHS waiver (if that were legally possible) than it would be if it were authorized and
implemented under federal law. Although federal statutes could be altered by a future
Congress, some protection is afforded by the size of California's Congressional delegation
and the difficulty of enacting federal legislation. While there are also limits on the ability of a
future Administration to change the terms of a waiver, it would be much easier to change
waiver terms compared to enacting new legislation. This is particularly true if a waiver
expires during the term of an administration that is not supportive of UF in California.
Given the uncertainty about whether federal support for a state-based UF system could be
obtained through existing Medicare, Medicaid, and ACA waiver authorities, or whether
changes in federal law would be required, CalHHS sought additional clarity from Brown &
Peisch, a law firm that specializes in federally-funded health and benefit programs, including
Medicaid, Medicare, and the Affordable Care Act.
In response, Brown & Peisch provided a legal memo included as Appendix C. Key points
include:
There is no single federal waiver authority that would allow the federal Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) to redirect federal funds for Medicare, Medicaid
(Medi-Cal), and Affordable Care Act (ACA) advance premium tax credits. Instead,
each funding stream is subject to different authorities that permit HHS to waive
certain federal requirements and limitations.
• Pursuing a UF model would require stitching together various authorities, each of
which has its own requirements for approval and most of which shift substantial
financial risk to the State. There are relatively straightforward paths with respect to
Medicaid and the ACA-covered population; however, these paths may be
complicated by the size and diversity of California's population. California might be
required to continue to track consumers who are Medicaid-eligible as CMS is unlikely
64 See slides and meeting synopsis from September 23, 2021 Commission meeting.
60Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
to depart from the basic principle that it can only match state expenditures under the
statutory formula. Although there are legal authorities that may allow for redirection of
Medicare funding, the challenges are much greater than in obtaining waivers for
Medicaid and the ACA-covered population and will depend in significant part on the
current federal administration's interest in supporting a state-based unified financing
system. Exercise of that authority would be unprecedented and politically challenging
because the state would be seeking to assume responsibility over benefits to which
Medicare beneficiaries are entitled by statute and might be seen as interfering with
Medicare beneficiary freedom of choice of providers. In addition, there may be
federal resistance to ceding authority to the state or compelling providers to
participate in a new payment and service delivery model.
An alternative that would allow California to better pursue full UF is enactment of new
federal waiver authority to allow states to use federal funding from existing health
care programs, including Medicare, Medicaid and the ACA exchanges, to deliver
comprehensive health care coverage. As an example, proposed legislation such as
H.R. 3775, the State-Based Universal Health Care Act, would provide the necessary
authority for HHS to direct federal funds to California as a lump sum.
In feedback on an earlier draft, some commissioners expressed the view that persuading
the federal government to relinquish funds and responsibility for Californians now eligible for
Medicare to a state-based UF authority would pose substantial political challenges. Even if
California Medicare beneficiaries support UF, these commissioners believe that Medicare
beneficiaries and advocates in other states, wary about any changes to existing Medicare
statutory health rights, would mount strenuous opposition. If this opposition materializes,
Californian's future efforts may need to consider a “partially-unified" approach in which
Medicare is not included, at least at the outset.
State Requirements Related to Raising and Using Funds for UF
Providing that federal permission and federal funding are secured, state-level decisions will
be needed about how to repurpose the approximately $200 billion that is currently spent on
employer and employee-paid premiums, out-of-pocket spending, and other sources.
California cannot operate with a budget deficit; thus careful financial planning and
appropriate financial reserves will be crucial in order for unified financing to succeed and
remain sustainable over time.
●
Provisions of California's State Constitution and other laws enacted by voter initiatives
constrain the Legislature's ability to substantially raise taxes and dedicate the proceeds
exclusively to health coverage or health spending. Voter approval would be required to
amend these provisions to allow for unified financing.
Article XIII A (added by Proposition 13 of 1978) requires a two-thirds vote of the
Legislature to increase state taxes and limits the ability to raise taxes on property
61Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
●
●
●
Article XIII B (added by Proposition 4 of 1979, often referred to as the State
Appropriations Limit or "Gann Limit") limits appropriations of proceeds of tax revenues
for most operating expenditures to state fiscal year 1978-79 levels adjusted for inflation
and population growth.
●
O
The scope and cost of unified health care financing system would exceed this
limit. Voters could exempt funds raised to support the unified health care financing
system from the State Appropriations Limit. Voters have approved such
exemptions in past instances, for example, sections 12, 13, 14, and 15 of Article
XIII B.
Article XVI, Section 8 (added by Proposition 98 of 1988) requires about 40 percent of
General Fund revenue to be allocated to K-12 schools and community colleges.
Article XVI, sections 20-22 (amended by Proposition 2 of 2014) requires 1.5 percent of
General Fund revenue and certain excess capital gains revenues to be deposited in
budget reserves and be used to pay down state debts.
The State Constitution and initiative statutes also constrain the Legislature's ability to redirect
funds from certain existing health care programs (to a unified health care financing system or for
other purposes) as follows:
O The Legislature could deposit revenues raised to support the unified health care
financing system in a special fund to not impact Proposition 98 and Proposition 2.
Given the amount of funding required to support a unified health care financing
system, voters could amend the State Constitution to explicitly affirm the
exemption of such funding from Proposition 98 and Proposition 2.
Article XI, section 15 and article XIII, section 25.2 (amended by Proposition 1A of 2004)
limits the ability of the Legislature to redirect certain local government revenues; some local
government funds are currently used to support certain health care programs administered
by local governments.
Article XIII, section 36 (amended by Proposition 30 of 2012) guarantees that certain tax
revenues will be provided to counties to pay for services realigned in 2011 including certain
mental health services and substance abuse services in Medi-Cal.
Article XVI, section 3.5 (added by Proposition 52 of 2016) requires voter approval to
substantively amend the Medi-Cal Reimbursement Improvement Act of 2013 which imposes
fees on private hospitals and uses fee revenue to draw down federal Medicaid funds to
support Medi-Cal hospital payments
Article XIII, section 36 (amended by Proposition 55 of 2016) increases personal income
taxes through 2030 and requires up to $2 billion annually to be allocated to Medi-Cal if
certain state budget conditions are met. As of 2022, this provision has not come into effect.
Proposition 99 of 1988 and Proposition 56 of 2016 impose taxes on tobacco products and
require a portion of those revenues to be allocated to specified state health care services
programs and to increase funding for existing Medi-Cal programs and services. In state
fiscal year 2021-22, tobacco revenues dedicated to health care are projected to total
approximately $1 billion.
62Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
The Mental Health Services Act (Proposition 63 of 2004) generates revenue from a one
percent tax on personal income in excess of $1 million and requires the revenue to support
various mental health programs, primarily at the county level. In state fiscal year 2021-22,
revenue raised by the Mental Health Services Act is projected to total approximately $3.7
billion.
The Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act (Proposition 64 of 2016) levies
excise taxes on the cultivation and retail sale of both adult-use and medicinal cannabis and
requires the revenue to support various cannabis legalization related activities, including
education, prevention, and treatment of youth substance use disorders and school retention.
In state fiscal year 2021-22, revenue raised by the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of
Marijuana Act for education, prevention, and treatment of youth substance use disorders
and school retention is projected to total approximately $401.8 million.
O
Voters could amend the State Constitution to allow these funds to be redirected to a
unified health care financing system notwithstanding any other law.
Governance
In order to ensure goals are met and funds are well-managed to achieve desired ends,
effective and trusted governance arrangements for the UF system will be required.
Legislation to establish a UF governing body would articulate the goals and responsibilities
of the body as well as its membership requirements and its relationship with elected and
appointed state government officials.
The goals of the governing body would presumably have much in common with the goals
and vision of the Healthy California for All Commission. The tasks of the governing body
would include an array of program policy and management matters, such as establishing
and updating provider payment arrangements, establishing performance reporting and
conducting budgeting and financial oversight, among many others.
The size and membership of the governing body would be influenced by considerations
such as knowledge and expertise across key domains including health care delivery,
financing, law and public health coverage programs; reflection of California's diversity,
including consideration of geographic, racial, ethnic and language, and socioeconomic
differences; and avoidance of real or perceived conflicts of interest. Effective governance
will require clear and robust prohibitions on conflicts of interest. Conflicts of interest could
take many forms but would include, for example, the disqualification of any individual or
employee of an organization with a direct financial interest in the decisions of the body.
The enabling legislation for a UF system will need to establish a governing body. At the
outset, the state UF authority will need to establish and maintain trust and credibility with
members of the Legislature and with federal authorities, as well as members of the public,
health care providers, and others with a stake in the current or future health care delivery
system. To serve the UF system's mission, it will be important to incorporate the
perspectives of diverse and representative Californians, including those with low incomes, in
63Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
decisions and oversight. Although it can be challenging, to take time to invite and
incorporate authentic community voices, it is essential in order to achieve more equity and
inclusivity in the UF health system envisioned for our state.
California has experience in establishing health authorities that have balanced these goals,
although not at the scale that will be required for a statewide UF system. For example, the
Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board (MRMIB), which over its existence from 1991
through 2014 administered health programs including the Major Risk Medical Insurance
Program (MRMIP), Access for Infants and Mothers (AIM), and Healthy Families also
established norms of transparency and accountability in governance of health care
programs.65
In 2010, following the passage of the ACA, California established the Health Benefit
Exchange, now Covered California, as an independent public entity within state
government. Its uncompensated five-member board, appointed by the Governor and the
Legislature, must not be employed by or have a financial interest in health care providers,
plans or trade associations. 66 Covered California imposes conflict of interest disclosure
requirements for executive staff.67 Bagley-Keene open meeting requirements impose
transparency requirements. Although Covered California's ability to maintain some contract
confidentiality drew some early criticism, 68 more recently observers have noted its
effectiveness in negotiating with plans and providers to advance statewide policy priorities.6⁹
Beginning in 1983, almost 40 years ago, local public health authorities were created in
California to operate locally run Medi-Cal managed plans. Today California has 16 local,
nonprofit health plans operating in 36 counties throughout the state serving the majority of
Medi-Cal beneficiaries enrolled in Medi-Cal managed care.70 These local public managed
care plans are created by county ordinance and in some cases by state statute and/or
federal legislation as well. All of their Boards of Directors or Commissions are appointed
under county ordinance by the County Board of Supervisors. The health authorities who
operate Medi-Cal managed care plans all operate under the Ralph M. Brown Act, an open
meeting law governing county government meetings with requirements similar to the state's
Bagley-Keene Act.
Prior California legislative proposals to establish a single payer health system envision
governance structures that would balance independence, expertise and accountability. A
2017 bill, SB 562 (Lara), would have established the Healthy California Board as an
65 An example of detailed reporting from MRMIB can be found in its 2006 Fact Book for the California Major
Risk Medical Insurance Program. For commentary on MRMIB's contributions and historical legacy see Gorn,
David, State Agency Nearing Extinction: 'We Have Accomplished Our Mission,' California Healthline, January
23, 2014.
66 California Government Code Title 22 Sec 100500
67 Covered California, Conflict of Interest Code, Final Amended Text of Regulations, January 16, 2020.
68 California Healthline, "Should Covered California Be Allowed To Keep Secrets?" July 11, 2013.
69 Levy, Noam, So You Think Obamacare is a disaster? Here's how California is proving you wrong, Los
Angeles Times, October 7, 2016.
70 Local Health Plans of California, accessed 12/21/21.
64Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
independent public entity governed by a 9-member board.71 Board members were to be
uncompensated and free of financial conflicts of interest. An uncompensated public
advisory committee including a range of health care providers, labor and employers to
advise the board was to have met regularly. Advisory committee meetings, like those of the
Board, would have been subject to Bagley-Keene open meeting requirements.
Systems and Infrastructure
Health Data Exchange
Policy decisions and financial considerations are of central importance in designing a
system of unified financing and have obvious implications for how and how well the system
works. Less visible, yet also crucial, is the underlying infrastructure needed to exchange
health information and track financial and clinical activity. While parts of California's health
care system rely on coordinated, interoperable electronic systems, other parts rely on
decentralized, manual, and siloed systems of clinical and administrative data exchange that
is voluntary in many situations. Consumers are too often left responsible for communicating
their information and facilitating hand-offs from one provider or care setting to another;
those who are most frail and sick are least able to play this role.
Safe and secure health information exchange across health and social services systems
serving specific needs of individuals is fundamental to supporting individual and population
health and wellbeing for several purposes, including but not limited to: addressing acute,
chronic, or complex health needs; managing care across the continuum of services;
supporting public health and emergency response efforts; and coordinating health and
social services for individuals transitioning from incarceration and back into the community.
Commissioner Wood and other commissioners noted the importance of health information
exchange in supporting efficient, high-quality health care (under UF and otherwise).
Currently, key data exchange barriers faced by organizations include: technical
infrastructure gaps for entities that often lack EHRs, such as small or rural providers,
behavioral health providers, long-term care providers, and correctional health care facilities;
data exchange barriers, such as fragmented data sources that limit the availability of a
comprehensive health record or limited connections with payers, behavioral health and
social service providers; and a lack of clear policies and requirements to share data
between payers, providers, hospitals, and public health systems, resulting in hesitancy
among organizations to share data.
To achieve the vision of a UF system, secure and seamless electronic health information
exchange across the state will be required, including security provisions to assure
consumers control the use and distribution of their information, as well as progress toward
form and data standardization. Led by CalHHS, the Data Exchange Framework workgroup
began meeting in August 2021 and seeks to establish a single data sharing agreement and
71 SB 562, The Healthy California Act (2017-18), February 17, 2017.
65Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
a common set of policies and procedures to govern and require the exchange of health
information among health care entities and government agencies in California. The Data
Exchange Framework has articulated a vision that "every Californian, and the health and
human service providers and organizations that serve them, will have timely and secure
access to usable electronic information that is needed to address their health and social
needs and enable the effective and equitable delivery of services to improve their lives and
wellbeing."
Potential follow up actions after the Data Exchange Framework enables routine data
sharing include exploring the benefits and feasibility of implementing a uniform clinical data
record, as advocated for by Commissioner Hsiao.
Unique Patient Identifier
The development and assignment of a unique patient identifier for every eligible resident will
be required to facilitate eligibility and enrollment and payment of services, either through
direct payment approaches or use of health plans or health systems. A unique patient
identifier ensures accurate matching of an insured resident with a patient claim issued by a
rendering provider 72 and is critical for matching the patient's identity with the correct
treatment or service for patient safety reasons. 73 It would also advance a longitudinal health
record for residents, and more readily allow for residents to control access to their
information.
Data on Race, Ethnicity and Language and Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Data collection and reporting is important not just to simplify interactions between
consumers and health care providers. Collecting and reporting standardized data is also
essential for managing costs, reducing fraud and abuse, and assessing quality. Given
California's diverse population and well-documented disparities in health outcomes, a
transformed health care system would capture Race, Ethnicity, and Language and Sexual
Orientation and Gender Identity (REaL/SOGI) demographic data and would stratify key
outcome indicators accordingly.
Claims and Encounter Data
In order to track outcomes and manage resources, under UF it will be important to carefully
monitor spending and service use at a granular level. The UF authority will need to capture
72 Provinces in Canada's single payer system issue each resident with a card and unique ID to establish
eligibility and issue payment to providers. Health plans in the U.S. also use their own unique identifiers for
enrolled members to ensure proper payment, benefits administration, and to reduce potential for fraud.
73 Today, regional and national health information exchange organizations (HIOs) implement expensive patient
matching services that are driven by a set of incomplete demographic characteristics (name, date of birth,
gender, address, and etc.). Patient matching results are uncertain and ambiguous as they rely on patient
matching algorithms based on probabilistic or deterministic patient matching logic. Implementing a unique
patient identifier would resolve this longstanding challenge and improve data exchange processes.
66Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
comprehensive and timely claims, encounter and/or payment data. Such data collection
could build on existing state initiatives to develop an all payer claims database, the Health
Care Payments Data (HPD) program administered by California's Department of Health
Care Access and Information (HCAI). The need to carefully monitor spending and service
use under UF will increase the value of the HPD as well as the CalHHS Data Exchange
Framework.
Steps on the Path to Unified Financing under State Authority
Under the principle of a "Healthy California for All," the Administration has launched and
implemented key initiatives to build the foundation of a unified financing system. In
combination, these initiatives improve equity, transparency and accountability across the
health care delivery system. Successful implementation of these initiatives will not only build
the framework and infrastructure needed to move toward a successful UF system, they will
increase confidence amongst the people of California in the ability of the state to transform
the health care delivery system. The Administration has taken action to advance the overall
well-being of California's 40 million residents and fundamentally reimagine the delivery
system. While the Commission did not have an in-depth discussion of the Administration's
key initiatives, the steps described below are informed by and supportive of the work of the
Healthy California for All Commission.
Universal: The Administration's significant investments in recent years to expand coverage
and increase affordability, along with the new proposal to cover the remaining uninsured in
Medi-Cal, will bring California to near-universal eligibility for health care coverage.
Expansion of Medi-Cal to All Income-Eligible Californians - Over the last decade, the
Medi-Cal program has significantly expanded to cover children, young adults, and
adults age 50 and over, regardless of immigration status. The Governor's 2022
Budget proposal expands full-scope eligibility to all income-eligible adults aged 26
through 49 regardless of immigration status, building on the prior year's expansion to
older adults age 50 and over regardless of immigration status. If the Governor's
proposal is approved by the Legislature, Medi-Cal will be available to all income-
eligible Californians by 2024.
Individual Mandate and Marketplace Premium Subsidies - The 2019 Budget Act
instituted a state individual mandate to stabilize the health insurance market and
authorized $1.5 billion over three years for state-supported premium subsidies at
Covered California to provide additional financial assistance to low-income
consumers and first-in-the-nation new subsidies for middle-income consumers who
were not eligible for federal subsidies at the time. Because the federal American
Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) provides significantly expanded federal subsidies through
2022, those have taken the place of the state subsidies, resulting in savings to the
state. If federal ARPA premium subsidies are extended for calendar year 2023 and
67Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
beyond, the state may have the opportunity to invest these funds for affordability
programs operated by Covered California starting in the plan year 2023.
Accessible: The Administration has undertaken multiple efforts to ensure Californians can
better access care, such as ensuring that California's health and human services workforce
reflects the state's ethnic and linguistic diversity, considerably expanding access to
telehealth and behavioral health services, providing enhanced care management for
enrollees with complex needs, and enabling care coordination through real-time exchange
of health information.
Building a Workforce for a Healthy California for All - The 2021 Budget Act includes
increased funding for a number of programs that support workforce development,
totaling over $140 million in one-time and ongoing funding, and the establishment of
the California Health Workforce Education and Training Council at the Department of
Health Care Access and Information to support and coordinate efforts for developing
a health workforce that meets California's health care needs. The Governor's Budget
for Fiscal Year 2022-23 proposes a substantial increase in state support for the
health and human services workforce. a $1.7 billion investment over three years in
care economy workforce development that will create more innovative and accessible
opportunities to recruit, train, hire, and advance an ethnically and culturally inclusive
health and human services workforce, with improved diversity, compensation, and
health-equity outcomes.
Children and Youth Behavioral Health Initiative - The 2021 Budget Act invested $2.9
billion over two years and $430 million ongoing, totaling over $4 billion over five
years, to transform the behavioral health system for children in the state into a
system that is prevention-focused, where all children and youth are routinely
screened, supported, and served for existing and emerging needs.
Behavioral Health Continuum Infrastructure Programs - The 2021 Budget Act
invested $2.2 billion in funding for competitive grants for the construction, acquisition,
and rehabilitation of facilities and mobile crisis infrastructure to expand the continuum
of behavioral health treatment resources. The critical investment in capital
infrastructure happening now will expand behavioral health capacity and support
existing state efforts on behavioral health integration, CalAIM, the Children and Youth
Behavioral Health Initiative, as well as homelessness.
Behavioral Health Services - The Medi-Cal reprocurement requires managed care
plans to implement "No Wrong Door" policies that include service coverage prior to
determining a diagnosis, co-occurring treatment, the use of DHCS-approved
standardized screening and transition tools for adults and children, and the
concurrent provision of Non-Specialty Mental Health Services and Specialty Mental
Health Services (SMHS). The reprocurement also includes contract requirements to
8888
68Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
●
ensure prior authorization and other utilization review controls do not delay access to
timely services.
Making Permanent Flexibilities for Telehealth - Because social distancing was
necessary to slow the spread of the coronavirus, many providers used telehealth,
when clinically appropriate, to deliver services they would typically deliver to patients
in-person. Under emergency authority pertaining to COVID-19, state regulators for
health care service plans and health insurers issued directives beginning March 2020
that required: 1) reimbursing providers at the same rate, whether a service is
provided in-person or through telehealth, if the service is the same regardless of the
modality of delivery, as determined by the provider's description of the service on the
claim; 2) for services provided via telehealth, not subject enrollees to cost-sharing
greater than the same cost-sharing if the service were provided in-person; 3) provide
the same amount of reimbursement for a service rendered via telephone as they
would if the service is rendered via video, provided the modality by which the service
is rendered (telephone versus video) is medically appropriate for the enrollee.
Learning from the experience of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the need to it,
policymakers have codified many of these pandemic-related flexibilities through AB
457 (Santiago, Chapter 439, Statutes of 2021).74 Given the importance of supporting
greater access to scarcely available services in lower resourced communities, these
efforts will help support timely access to care for millions of Californians.
Medi-Cal Enhanced Care Management Benefit – Medi-Cal enrollees with complex
needs must often engage several delivery systems to access care, including primary
and specialty care, dental, mental health, substance use disorder, and long-term
services and supports. Under CalAIM, the ECM benefit will address clinical and non-
clinical needs of the highest-need enrollees through intensive coordination of health
and health-related services. It will meet enrollees wherever they are on the street,
in a shelter, in their doctor's office, or at home. Additionally, enrollees will have
connections to Community Supports to meet their social needs, including medically
supportive foods or housing supports. Enrollees will have a single Enhanced Care
Manager who will coordinate care and services, making it easier for them to get the
right care at the right time.
Enabling Care Coordination through Health Information Exchange (HIE) – The 2021
Budget Act puts California on a path to building a single data sharing agreement that
will govern real-time HIE beginning in June 2024. The agreement will be designed to
74 Prior to the passage of AB 457, AB 744 (Aguiar-Curry, Chapter 867, Statutes of 2019), barred health care
service plans and health insurers from requiring in-person contact to occur prior to initiating telehealth
services, prohibited limited the setting or providers that may use telehealth, required payment parity between
health care services delivered in-person and through telehealth, and required obtaining patient consent prior to
the utilization of telehealth, and allows all forms of telehealth (e.g., phone only, video, synchronous and/or
asynchronous). Under AB 457, the effective date associated with AB 744 was removed, which extended the
bill's requirements to all state-regulated health plans, except for Medi-Cal plans.
69Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
enable and require real-time access to, or exchange of, health information among
providers and payers through any HIE network, health information organization, or
technology that adheres to specified standards and policies. The vision is "every
Californian, and the health and human service providers and organizations that serve
them, will have timely and secure access to usable electronic information that is
needed to address their health and social needs and enable the effective and
equitable delivery of services to improve their lives and wellbeing."
Affordable: The Administration will hold the health care industry accountable for increasing
costs, to ensure that health care is affordable for all Californians while ensuring that the
health care system is sustainable over the long term.
Office of Health Care Affordability - Accomplishing cost containment will require a
comprehensive understanding of cost trends and drivers of health care spending
across the state. The Administration will move forward with its proposal to establish
an Office of Health Care Affordability (OHCA) to address underlying cost drivers and
improve the affordability of health coverage, benefiting millions of working
Californians. The Office will be charged with increasing transparency on cost and
quality, developing cost targets for the health care industry, enforcing compliance
through financial penalties, and improving market oversight of transactions that may
adversely impact market competition, prices, quality, access, and the total cost of
care.
Health Care Payments Data Program (HPD) – Ongoing implementation of a state all-
payer claims database or HPD, enables the use of claims, encounter, and payment
information to produce analyses, research, and public reporting to support
transparency, oversight, and accountability of California's health care delivery
system. In addition to supporting OHCA, the HPD will provide valuable insights for
statewide system costs and utilization, disease prevalence, longitudinal and
population-based outcomes analyses, and measures of health care equity and
disparities. The HPD is on track to begin producing initial analytical reports after July
1, 2023 and evolve to support linkages between various datasets that can enhance
quality and outcomes analysis.
Medi-Cal Rx - Under Executive Order N-01-19, all Medi-Cal pharmacy services were
transitioned in January 2022 to a single standardized delivery system for over 14
million Medi-Cal beneficiaries, including the transition of the Medi-Cal pharmacy
services from managed care to fee-for-service. Medi-Cal Rx results in a consolidated
state negotiation and purchasing system for Medi-Cal pharmacy, strengthening the
state's ability to negotiate state supplemental drug rebates with drug manufacturers,
and creates a uniform Medi-Cal pharmacy provider network and pharmacy utilization
policy.
70Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Equitable: The health care system alone cannot address all the factors that influence health
and will need to partner with public health and other sectors to address social drivers of
health. In addition to fortifying the public health infrastructure that benefits all Californians,
the Administration has reoriented the Medi-Cal program, covering 14 million Californians, to
explicitly focus on health equity.
●
Reducing The Cost of Insulin through CalRx - The insulin market has long
epitomized the kinds of market failures that plague the pharmaceutical industry. The
Administration is working on plans to bring generic insulin to the market in California
that is priced at a fraction of current market prices, which often exceed $300 per vial.
Success in addressing the insulin affordability crisis will lay the foundation for state-
led manufacturing of additional low-cost generic drugs.
●
California Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) - A better Medi-Cal program
is a key building block of California's broad commitment to building a healthier and
more equitable state. As such, CalAIM encompasses a broad-based delivery system
program and payment reform across the Medi-Cal program to move California's
whole-person care approach to a statewide level, with a clear focus on improving
population health and reducing health disparities and inequities. In particular, Medi-
Cal will provide new enhanced case management benefits that include non-clinical
community supports to certain high-need, hard-to-reach populations, with the
objective of improving health outcomes for beneficiaries and other low-income
individuals in the state. By extending supports and services beyond hospitals and
health care settings and directly into California communities, CalAIM will meet
people where they are in life, address social drivers of health, and break down the
walls of health care
Fortifying the Public Health System - The COVID-19 pandemic has underscored the
need for investment in our public health infrastructure, both to respond to public
health emergencies and to improve the overall population health of California's
population. As a result, the 2021 Budget Act included $300 million General Fund per
year for investments in public health infrastructure that will improve the health of all
Californians by increasing collaboration between state and local governments, the
work force, data collection and integration, and community partnerships.
Directing Non-Profit Hospital Community Benefit Funding to Community-Based
Organizations - State and federal community benefit laws require non-profit
hospitals, which are exempt from most federal, state, and local taxes, to provide
community benefits. To promote additional investment in community-based
organizations (CBO) that are focused on public health efforts, the Administration
proposes to require non-profit hospitals to direct a specified percentage of community
benefit dollars to investments that address the social drivers of health.
71Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Hospital Equity Reporting - Assembly Bill 1204 (Wicks, Chapter 751, Statutes of
2021)75 requires general acute care hospitals, acute psychiatric hospitals, specialty
hospitals, and hospital systems to prepare and file with the Department of Health
Care Access and Information (HCAI) an equity report analyzing patient equity data
and providing plans by which identified inequities will be addressed. HCAI is also
required to convene a Health Care Equity Measures Advisory Committee to provide
recommendations regarding the measures to be used by hospitals, hospital systems,
and integrated delivery systems in their equity reports.
Additional equity efforts include the DMHC Health Plan Quality and Equity Standards,
described immediately below.
High Quality: The Administration will hold health plans accountable for delivering high
quality care that is safe, effective, timely, patient-centered, efficient, and equitable, as well
as align efforts across multiple payers to maximize impact on quality and equity.
Health Plan Quality and Equity Standards – The 2021 Budget Act requires the
Department of Managed Health Care (DMHC) to establish health equity and quality
benchmark standards for health plans and to hold health plans accountable to those
standards. DMHC has convened a Health Equity and Quality Committee to provide
recommendations, including effective ways to measure health outcomes through
demographic data or other data related to race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic variables
and approaches to stratifying reporting of results by demographic factors to
determine impacts on health equity and quality.
Medi-Cal Managed Care Plan Procurement - In February 2022, the Department of
Health Care Services released a Request for Proposal (RFP) for its commercial
Medi-Cal managed care plan contracts to redefine how care is delivered, what leads
to health equity and healthy communities, how to better hold the health care delivery
system accountable for transparency, quality and results. New contract requirements
for managed care plans include: accountability for the quality of care at all levels of
delegation, including justification for the use of delegated entities and subcontractors;
emphasis on coordination and integration of care through enhanced and expanded
Basic Population Health Management, Complex Care Management, and Enhanced
Care Management to ensure needs of entire population are met across the
continuum of care; health disparity reduction targets for specific populations and
measures, annual reporting of health equity activities and findings, and development
of equity-focused interventions to address identified health disparities and social
drivers of health; and sanctions and surrender of a portion of profits if quality
improvement benchmarks are not achieved. By re-bidding commercial Medi-Cal
managed care contracts, California will ensure that managed care plans are
75 AB 1204 (Chapter 751, Statutes of 2021) and amended Chapter 2 Section 127345 and newly created
127376 of the Health and Safety Code.
72Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
committed to, capable of, and accountable for meeting the state's goal of achieving a
Healthier California for All.
Multi-Payer Alignment Efforts to Maximize Impact on Quality and Equity - The
Covered California Quality Transformation Initiative (QTI) is a quality improvement
payment program intended to set direct and substantial financial consequences for
qualified health plans (QHP) to improve the quality of health care and to reduce
health disparities. Specifically, the QTI focuses on improving care for a focused
number of clinically important conditions for which there are major opportunities for
improvement and good measures in current use. QHPs that fail to meet specified
quality levels will be required to make payments that may be as high as 4% of
premium. Covered California, CalPERS and Medi-Cal together are responsible for
coverage for over 17 million Californians and are working together to align
contractual requirements to drive higher quality and more equitable outcomes. The
benefit of multi-payer alignment is that providers are given a consistent set of signals
to focus their improvement efforts for quality and equity. Covered California is
working to align both the selection of measures and the existence of substantial
financial consequences with other major purchasers, including the California
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), CalPERS, and the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services' (CMS) Medicare payment programs. For the year
2023-25 contract, measures for high blood pressure control, diabetes management,
colorectal cancer screening and childhood immunization status will be tied to
payments for performance that should, in alignment with other purchasers, drive
higher quality and more equitable outcomes.
Priority Actions and Next Steps
This section begins by summarizing how unified financing will advance California's goals;
summarizes input offered by commissioners via the December survey regarding important
next steps; and concludes by identifying additional steps by CalHHS that can increase
momentum toward UF after the work of the Commission concludes.
The "North Star:" Unified Financing
Through commissioner discussions, analytic findings and input via community engagement,
the Healthy California for All process clarified that unified financing offers unique benefits
and creates significant opportunities, beyond those available under the current system, to
achieve goals of universality, improved equity, affordability, access and quality:
73Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
●
Universal: UF would create universal coverage, filling the gap for the one in ten
Californians under age 65 who lack insurance in our current system. 76 All
Californians would receive a comprehensive package of health care services and
coverage arrangements that do not vary by age, employment, income, immigration
status, disability status, or other characteristics.
Accessible: Expansion of coverage and elimination of underinsurance would result
in the vast majority of Californians having a usual source of care under UF, compared
to our current system in which 11 percent of insured Californians and 52 percent of
uninsured lack a usual source of care.
Affordable: Under UF, households would no longer directly pay monthly premiums,
resulting in a significant improvement in affordability even after accounting for
revenues repurposed from the non-federal amount currently spent on health care. If
cost-sharing is used, it would be progressively structured with respect to individual or
household income. Services such as LTSS and dental that many struggle to afford
under the status quo would be covered with no or low cost sharing.
• Equitable: UF, by eliminating distinctions in care and coverage among Medi-Cal,
employer-sponsored insurance, Medicare, non-group coverage, and the uninsured,
would lead to a substantial increase in equity in how care is delivered. Well-crafted
payment systems and accountability mechanisms would, over time, substantially
improve access to care and provide additional incentives to providers for the care of
vulnerable populations.
High Quality: UF, by creating a simpler and more uniform system of coverage and
payment, and by aligning incentives in a way that the status quo fragmented
financing system cannot, has the potential to encourage health care providers and
health systems to focus on improvements in care quality, in population health, on
investments in primary care and prevention, and on reductions in disparities.
Today's fragmented financing structures impedes or prevents improvements in all these
dimensions, whereas a system of unified financing would enable California to implement
and spread improvements across the state. California is pursuing and could continue to
build on policies that improve upon the status quo, such as coverage expansions in Medi-
Cal or increased state-financed subsidies in Covered California to defray premium costs.
However, despite an ambitious agenda of actions under state authority, described in the
previous section, incentives and requirements imposed by fragmented payers would
continue to impose administrative burden, dilute efforts to improve outcomes, and provide
opportunities to game the system. Thus, a system of unified financing must be the “North
Star" toward which future policy and programmatic efforts are directed.
76 This and subsequent statistics cited in this section come from the Overview of Analytic Findings presented
to the Healthy California for All Commission on May 21, 2021.
74Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Clearing a Threshold Issue: Federal Permissions and Federal Funding
As previously described, over $200 billion in annual health care spending within California is
currently governed by federal authority and requirements related to Medicaid, Medicare, the
Affordable Care Act and other federal programs. Thus, a threshold issue for California
involves securing federal permissions to redirect and consolidate existing federal funding for
Medicaid, Medicare, and ACA advance premium tax credits within a state unified financing
system. An agreement with the federal government to include federal Medicare and
Medicaid funds within the state UF system must also secure a sustainable rate of growth for
redirected federal funds. The level of federal funding approved has direct consequences for
the amount the state would need to repurpose from the non-federal amount currently spent
on health care.
To resolve this threshold issue, the state should engage the federal Secretary of Health and
Human Services and leaders within the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
to gain a better understanding of what could be accomplished through existing waivers, and
what changes would require federal legislation. If necessary, the state should work with
federal partners to advance legislation to enact needed federal waiver authority. The
Newsom Administration has begun initial engagement with the federal government on state
flexibility for health coverage programs through two letters sent to President Trump and
President Biden. 77
1) Provided there is federal waiver authority to proceed, the state would work with
federal partners to specify the amount of federal funding California would receive
under UF in Year 1 as well as the method of determining the growth rate of that
funding over time.
2) The state would likely need to provide assurances to its federal partners that under
UF, Californians previously enrolled in Medi-Cal, Medicare and eligible for ACA
premium subsidies would receive benefits and protections commensurate or superior
to those programs. The state would also need to assure that the design and
implementation of the state-based UF system would not run afoul of federal
Employment Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) provisions, although this issue
might well be resolved through potential legal challenges rather than be elevated as
a concern by federal partners in the context of health care financing negotiations.
(See Appendix D for further explanation of ERISA related challenges.)
3) With greater certainty on sustainable federal funding, the state could more definitively
consider what portion of the non-federal amount currently spent on health care could
be repurposed to support UF.
77 One letter was sent to the Trump Administration on January 7, 2019 and another letter to the Biden
Administration on May 25, 2021.
75Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
To achieve a sustainable agreement with federal partners, further specification of an
approach that achieves California's vision and fits within an existing or new federal legal
framework would be required. More on how to achieve that outcome is described below
under the section titled Moving Forward.
Commissioner Perspectives on Priority Actions
Via responses to the December 2021 survey,78 commissioners expressed broad agreement
that all of the following activities "represent important steps on the path" to a Healthy
California for All unified financing system:
●
●
●
●
●
Establish and implement a prospective per capita health care spending target;
Address workforce shortages in underserved domains and geographic areas with a
focus on increasing the cultural and language diversity of these workers;
Expand training for doctors, nurses and other clinical staff with a focus on equity and
the important cultural differences between diverse groups across the state;
Expand and standardize cost reporting for hospitals, medical groups, and other
health care settings;
Aggregate purchasing power among payers within the status quo to demonstrate
success in negotiating payment methods and rates with pharmaceutical companies
and/or other providers of health care services;
Establish a statewide system for patient identification and clinical data exchange;
Decide on a set of quality indicators that should be captured in initial stages of UF;
Establish a uniform claims/encounter data system to capture and report data across
all payers who deliver services under the status quo;
Building on California's large integrated delivery systems, refine and expand efforts to
align payments with value (i.e., pay for high quality);
Establish global budgets and all payer rate-setting and begin to address existing
payment variation;
Identify specific options for raising revenues that would substitute for non-federal
health care spending;
Obtain legislative and/or voter approval for the revenue plan; and
Secure from the federal government guarantees regarding the payments California
can count on with respect to federal share of Medicare and Medicaid payment.
Agreement was not as strong on the following items; nevertheless, most responding
commissioners also indicated that the following were important steps on the path to UF:
Identify "winners and losers" under UF among providers, consumers, employers and
other participants in the health care sector and develop plans to mitigate negative
impacts;
78 Commissioners' responses about the importance of various steps does not speak to how various steps
should be sequenced or whether some steps are prerequisites for others.
76Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
Establish global budgets and all payer rate-setting and begin to address existing
payment variation; and
Standardize and align contracts among payers for how they pay for care, including
for improvements in cost, quality, and equity.
The December 2021 survey also invited commissioners to specify up to three activities they
judged to be most important steps on the path to UF. In prioritizing the 15 items suggested
(with open-ended responses also invited), Commissioners expressed diverse priorities.
Among steps that attracted at least one "most important" vote among the 11 responding
commissioners, responses are shown in Table 6 below.
Table 6: Commission Ranking of Potential Transition Steps. Number of Commissioners
saying step is most important or very important.
Transition Step
Address workforce shortages in underserved
domains and geographic areas
Establish and implement a prospective per capita
health care spending target
Aggregate purchasing power among payers within
the status quo to demonstrate success in
negotiating payment methods and rates with
pharmaceutical companies and/or other providers of
health care services
Obtain legislative and/or voter approval for the
revenue plan
Secure from the federal government guarantees
regarding the payments California can count on with
respect to federal share of Medicare and Medicaid
payment
Establish global budgets and all payer rate-setting
and begin to address existing payment variation
Identify specific options for raising revenues that
would substitute for non-federal health care
spending
Establish a statewide system for patient
identification and clinical data exchange
Expand culturally sensitive training for doctors,
nurses and other clinical staff
77
Among 3 "most
important"
4
4
3
3
3
3
2
1
1
"Very
important"
10
8
10
9
8
7
10
9Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Transition Step
Establish a uniform claims/encounter data system
to capture and report data across all payers who
deliver services under the status quo
Building on California's large integrated delivery
systems, refine and expand efforts to align
payments with value (i.e., pay for high quality)
Identify winners and losers among providers,
consumers, employers and other participants in the
health care sector and develop plans to mitigate
negative impacts
Other: Start with children and families
Other: Pass legislation on policy and establish
governance structure
Among 3 "most
important"
1
1
78
1
1
1
"Very
important"
9
8
6
N/A
N/A
Moving Forward
The Commission's work has demonstrated that UF offers unique benefits and creates
significant opportunities, beyond those available under the current system, to achieve goals
of universality, improved equity, affordability, access and quality. Moving forward, California
should further clarify its desired approach, continue conversations with federal partners, and
be ready to act decisively as windows of opportunity open.
In order to navigate issues related to federal funding and permissions, an iterative process
is likely to be needed in which California seeks further clarity via federal engagement, then
consults with state constituencies and stakeholders to refine and specify its preferred
approach, and then bring a specific proposal to federal authorities. Figure 7 illustrates that
process.Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Figure 7: Iterative Process to Clear Threshold Issue of Federal Permissions and Federal
Funding
OBTAIN FEDERAL PERMISSIONS &
FEDERAL FUNDING
Gain a clear understanding of what is specified
and allowable under existing law and waiver
authority
•
• If necessary, work with federal partners to
advance legislation to enact new federal authority
STATUS QUO FRAGMENTED
FINANCING
THRESHOLD ISSUE:
Federal permissions
and funding
UNIFIED PUBLIC FINANCING
.
M
REFINE DESIGN (with community and stakeholder
engagement)
Specify eligibility and enrollment rules
Confirm covered benefits (including LTSS)
79
Determine if and how cost sharing will be used
Determine how best to operationalize prospective global
budgets for hospitals
Determine payment approaches for outpatient providers
and methods for equality focused payments or
adjustments
Specify purchasing arrangements and role, if any, for
organizer and/or intermediaries
Develop systems of accountability to transparently
measure performance and take action when necessary:
(1) who is accountable? and (2) what are they
accountable for?
• If sustainable federal funding for UF can be secured,
develop options for repurposing a portion of the non-
federal amount currently spent on health care
Commission deliberations have touched on a wide range of decisions and actions that will
pave California's way to a system of unified financing. Acknowledging that some activities
are not neatly confined to one stage, activities can be grouped into the following stages:
Lay the Foundation: These activities set up the structures, resources and capabilities
essential to supporting UF, but are not necessarily prerequisites to UF. Many are
already underway and most yield benefits under existing financing arrangements,
though their relevance will be heightened and their impact deepened under UF.
Obtain Federal Permissions and Refine Design: As described above, a crucial step
will be to secure federal permissions to redirect and consolidate federal Medicaid,
Medicare, and ACA advance premium tax credits funds within a state unified
financing system in a way that is predictable and sustainable over time. Engagement
with federal authorities will bring into focus considerations and tradeoffs that influence
the ultimate design of UF in California. These activities will define exactly what UF
will look like and how it will affect Californians, health care providers, and institutions.
As described at several points in this report, broad and deep community and
stakeholder engagement is important in understanding and choosing among
available options. If there is a pathway to clear the threshold issue of federal
permissions and federal funding, a community and stakeholder engagement process
can be convened to describe implications of options and alternatives, hear concerns,
and incorporate priorities. Ultimately, a solid design and federal funding will secureKey Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
●
the resources and commitments required for California's move to UF and set the
stage for smooth implementation.
Implement and Sustain: Robust data reporting, transparent governance, and efficient
operations will support an effective launch and allow the UF system to make course
corrections as needed over time.
Table 7 provides illustrative tasks within each category. The move to UF will be a complex
undertaking in a fluid context; it is not possible to list all the steps nor to anticipate the exact
sequence in which they will unfold.
80Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Table 7: Stages on California's Path to Unified Financing
Lay the Foundation
Obtain Federal Permissions and Refine Design
●
●
●
Build expanded,
culturally sensitive
workforce
Expand behavioral
health capacity
Collect and use
health care
payments data
Achieve health
information
exchange
Fortify the public
health system
Establish equity and
quality standards
Standardize and
align payments for
care, including
payments
associated with
cost, quality and
equity
Demonstrate
pharmaceutical cost
savings
Implement cost
containment
measures
Gain a clear understanding of what is specified and
allowable under existing law and waiver authority
with respect to federal permissions and federal
funding
• If necessary, work with federal partners to advance
legislation to enact new federal authority
• If there is a pathway to clear the threshold issue of
federal permissions and federal funding, convene a
robust community and stakeholder engagement to
refine the following design priorities:
●
1. Specify eligibility and enrollment rules
2. Confirm covered benefits (including LTSS)
3. Determine if and how cost sharing will be
used
4. Determine how to best operationalize
5.
6.
prospective global budgets for hospitals
Determine payment approaches for
outpatient providers and methods for
equality focused payments or adjustments
Specify purchasing arrangements and role,
if any, for organizer and/or intermediaries
Develop systems of accountability to
transparently measure performance and
take action when necessary: (1) who is
accountable? and (2) what are they
accountable for?
7.
8. If sustainable federal funding for UF can be
secured, develop options for repurposing a
portion of the non-federal amount currently
spent on health care
Through a public communications campaign,
describe how UF can improve access, quality,
equity and affordability yet reduce total health care
spending relative to status quo fragmented
financing
Establish governance structures
Support regional preparedness of providers and
facilities
• Establish, vet and refine standards for quality,
access and equity
• Establish funding reserves and contingency plans to
deal with potential uncertainty
Implement and Sustain
81
• If there is a feasible
path on federal
permissions and
adequate and
sustainable funding,
secure statutory
changes through the
enactment of enabling
legislation and/or voter
approval through a
ballot initiative
. Govern with
transparency and
accountability
• Manage data and
conduct oversight to
support smooth
operations
• Monitor outcomes and
●
implement
improvement strategies
as needed
Update policies,
payment levels and
approaches, and
revenue strategies as
needed to achieve
goals
Within the Laying the Foundation category, high level illustrative tasks listed are informed by
the discussion in earlier portions of the report (Steps on the Pathway to Unified Financing
under State Authority and Commissioner Perspectives on Priority Actions); these tasks can
significantly reform the current system and be initiated immediately as the state seeks more
clarity on federal permissions and funding. A more concrete, but non-exhaustive, set of nextKey Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
steps - all of which would improve access, affordability, equity and quality under status quo
financing, although their impact would be deepened under UF - include the following:
1. Workforce: Invest in and support a workforce that is diverse, that can meet the
cultural, socioeconomic, and linguistic diversity of California's residents and that is
responsive to consumer and patient needs.
2.
Enact Office of Health Care Affordability: Establish health care cost targets and
address cost drivers in order to slow growth in health care spending.
3. Cost of Delivering Care: Leverage existing data and identify data gaps that have to
be overcome to understand the actual cost of delivering frequently performed
medical services (such as inpatient care, imaging, etc.).
4. Role of Health Plans: Evaluate whether health plans under the status quo add
value by furthering access, affordability, quality and equity while accounting for
excessive administrative costs and profits and burden on providers. If health plans
are retained and reimagined under UF, what functions would they perform?
5. Uniform Clinical Data Record: Once policies for data sharing are in place under
the forthcoming Data Exchange Framework, explore the potential benefits and
feasibility of developing a statewide uniform clinical record.
6. Administrative Costs: Further study of the administrative burden on providers
under the status quo and potential administrative cost savings under UF.
7. Fraud and Abuse: Upon implementation of the Health Care Payments Data
Program, identify and take action on claims fraud and overbilling.
Commission deliberations and steps within state authority that are already underway form a
solid foundation for next steps. To make additional progress on the path toward unified
financing - and to move from laying the foundation to obtaining federal permissions and
refining design - CalHHS should secure and task dedicated staff and resources to develop
and implement a strategy for engagement with federal partners on the necessary federal
approvals to proceed with UF and identify the next steps that will be needed at the federal
level. This process could start with informal engagement by CalHHS staff of their
counterparts at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to determine the broad
contours of what approaches the federal government is prepared to consider. If
conversations with federal partners confirm there is a feasible path forward, CalHHS would
engage with stakeholders to develop a full proposal that will need to:
1. Specify eligibility and enrollment rules
2. Confirm covered benefits (including LTSS)
3. Determine if and how cost sharing will be used
4. Determine how best to operationalize prospective global budgets for hospitals and
other institutional providers
5. Determine payment approaches for non-institutional providers and methods for
equality focused payments or adjustments
6. Specify purchasing arrangements and role, if any, for organizer and/or intermediaries
7. Develop systems of accountability to transparently measure performance and take
action when necessary: (1) who is accountable? and (2) what are they accountable
for?
82Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
8. Develop options for repurposing a portion of the non-federal amount currently spent
on health care
A dedicated team within CalHHS, informed by engagement with federal authorities and
tasked with convening stakeholders and developing a proposal, might be held accountable
for the following deliverables:
●
Reporting on options and feasibility related to obtaining federal permissions
Prepare a draft specific design proposal, including recommendations on Items 1-8 above
Community and stakeholder engagement to inform final design before submission
As discussed previously, California's success in moving to UF will demand creative legal,
policy, and political solutions that take into consideration a range of stakeholder
perspectives. Some decisions and actions that lie on the critical path to UF require further
investigation and development of consensus across key constituencies that include health
care providers, health care systems, employers, labor unions, and consumers including
Californians with low incomes, Medicare beneficiaries, and people with employer-sponsored
insurance. Since federal approvals may be contingent on specific assurances pertaining to
the Medicare program, it will be critical to obtain the buy-in of Medicare beneficiaries by
ensuring they understand what is being proposed, how they could benefit, and how any
remaining concerns will be mitigated.
As a necessary step to build political support for UF, state leaders will need to engage with
these key constituencies to gather their input on design options and transition plans.
For providers and systems, discussion topics would include payment methods and
levels and structures; how quickly to standardize payments; and what financial and
health care quality reporting to require.
For employers and labor unions, discussion topics would include pros and cons from
employer and worker perspectives of options to repurpose a portion of the non-
federal amount currently spent on health care.
For the broader community, discussion topics could include access to care,
enrollment, benefits, cost-sharing, provider networks and quality, and transparency.
● With all interested parties, topics could include options for delivery system design; the
role for a coordinating entity or entities and the potential use of intermediaries;
accountability indicators; and governance structures. Many stakeholders would also
provide useful input regarding infrastructure requirements.
Navigating the threshold issue of federal permissions and federal funding may involve
tradeoffs or impose constraints that have important implications for health care providers
and employers. Thus two-way engagement with stakeholders explaining state-federal
dynamics and soliciting their input will be important both symbolically and substantively in
moving California toward UF. Meanwhile, several actions, such as those described above,
can happen in parallel to build the foundation for a system of unified financing that is
accessible, affordable, equitable, high-quality and universal.
83Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Conclusion
The Commission, through its discussions and deliberations, determined that California
should move toward a unified financing system for health care services. UF will increase
California's ability to make health care more affordable, comprehensive and consistent;
make accessing health care simpler and more reliable; address inequities and disparities in
care and access; build an expanded and more appropriate workforce; and confront the
inherent power imbalance that people with low incomes and people of color often
experience in the existing health care system.
Unified financing will be a marked improvement relative to the existing fragmented health
care financing and delivery arrangements which compromise access to services and quality
of care for many Californians; add administrative complexity that create confusion and
frustration among consumers; encourage many entities to prioritize profit over care; drive up
spending without commensurate improvements in quality, equity or consumer experience;
and lead to persistent inequities by income level, region, race and ethnicity. A move toward
UF provides California more leverage to reduce the overall growth of health care spending
and address affordability challenges. Even more importantly, unified financing will allow
California to fundamentally reimagine the delivery system to more effectively advance the
overall well-being of California's 40 million residents.
As California lays the foundation for UF, there are immediate opportunities to expand on
efforts to build a culturally, racially and ethnically diverse health workforce; establish
performance standards for equity and quality; improve transparency; achieve health
information exchange; and demonstrate effective cost containment strategies in ways that
support UF. Engagement with federal partners to better understand federal funding
constraints and opportunities will help to further refine California's options. Informed by a
deeper understanding of the federal context, California will need to clarify what features and
design details will fit best within the California context, a process that should be informed by
robust community and stakeholder engagement. As the design comes into focus, plans and
a detailed timeline can be finalized, agreements secured, and implementation preparations
begun. It will be important to begin early in the process to define what accountability looks
like in terms of access, quality and equity standards while acknowledging that those
standards will benefit from refinement over time. Throughout the development process,
continued community engagement; engagement with health care providers and others
involved in advocating for, arranging and delivering care today to vet and determine how UF
will work; and strong and effective communications to demonstrate the advantages and
potential of UF relative to the status quo will help set the stage for success.
There is a stark contrast between the potential of UF and the flaws of status quo health
care. The Commission has helped identify and elevate next steps on the path toward UF,
some of which are already underway. The continued commitment and leadership of
dedicated Californians, including those who offered their time and expertise to this
Commission's work, will assure California's continued progress toward a health care system
84Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
focused on delivering health and allowing all Californians an opportunity to live up to their
full potential and ultimately creating a Healthy California for All.
85Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Appendix A: Commissioner Survey "Goals and Propositions"
Through surveys the statements shown below were presented to commissioners who were
asked to respond with "Agree,” “Agree with slight modifications,” “Disagree,” or "Don't
Know." Some of the statements presented via the November survey had been refined in
response to input from the September survey. Reactions from voting commissioners are
summarized in reports from the two survey cycles available at the Healthy California for All
webpage. (See "Meeting Information" documents for September 28, 2021 survey synthesis
and the November 17, 2021 survey report.)
September Statements
Healthy California for All: A "Healthy California for
All" envisions a California health care system that
delivers safe, timely, efficient, equitable and
person-centered care for all Californians through a
system of unified financing.
Integration and Coordination: California's health
care system should deliver care that is integrated
and coordinated across all types of diagnoses and
the continuum of care.
Accountability: Care quality and health outcomes
for individuals and for populations should be
monitored and systems of accountability should be
established.
Payment: Provider payments, including methods of
payment and levels of payment, can exert leverage
to address inequities and to improve access, cost
efficiency, quality, and outcomes.
Equity: The health care system should proactively
monitor, mitigate, and eliminate racial and ethnic
disparities in health care access and quality.
November Statements
Healthy California for All: A "Healthy California for All"
envisions a sustainable California unified financing
system for health care through which safe, timely,
efficient, equitable and person-centered health care
advances the mental and physical health and well-
being of all Californians. The system would assure
that care is affordable, accessible and treats all
people with respect.
Integration and Coordination: California's health care
system should deliver care that is integrated and
coordinated across all types of diagnoses and the
continuum of care.
Accountability: Care quality and health outcomes for
individuals and for populations should be monitored.
Robust systems of accountability to assure high-
quality, equitable outcomes should be maintained,
expanded or established.
Payment and Funding: Provider payments and
funding, including methods of payment and levels of
payment, should be used to address inequities and
to improve access and quality.
Equity: The health care system should proactively
monitor, mitigate, and work to eliminate disparities in
health care access and quality, including those
resulting from structural discrimination related to race
and ethnicity, those associated with income,
immigration status, disability, sexual orientation and
gender identity, and the intersectional effects among
these characteristics. The health care system should
also contribute to addressing social determinants of
health that compromise health status.
86Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
September Statements
Public Health, Prevention and Population Health:
The health care system should address not just the
acute, short-term needs of individuals but should
focus on prevention and the social and structural
factors that affect long-term health outcomes for
individuals and populations.
Sustainability: A new universal, unified health care
system implies a long-term commitment by the
State of California and will require sustainable
financing.
To effectively advance a Healthy California for All,
Unified Financing is required.
To effectively advance a Healthy California for All,
health plans should be retained but reimagined,
encouraging their role in care coordination and
population health management but imposing
greater regulation on their contributions to cost and
administrative burden.
To effectively advance a Healthy California for All,
health plans and other risk bearing intermediaries
should be eliminated.
Individuals selecting or being assigned a primary
care provider that coordinates their care.
Integrating behavioral health and primary care
services.
Identifying and supporting dedicated entities that
coordinate care for complex, high need
populations.
November Statements
Public Health, Prevention and Population Health: The
health care system should address not just the acute,
short-term needs of individuals but should focus on
prevention. In coordination with other sectors, the
health care system should work to address the social
and structural factors that affect well-being, functional
status and long-term health outcomes for individuals
and populations.
Sustainability: A new universal, unified health care
system requires policy alignment and action at the
federal level and a long-term commitment by the
State of California and will require sustainable
financing.
In order to advance a Healthy California for All, the
state should move to a system of unified financing.
To effectively advance a Healthy California for All
through a system of unified financing, integrated
delivery systems should play a continued or
increased role in care coordination and population
health management.
To effectively advance a Healthy California for All, if
health plans are retained they should be subject to
greater regulation with respect to cost, profit and
administrative burden.
Added: To effectively advance a Healthy California
for All through a system of unified financing, health
plans and all risk bearing intermediaries should be
eliminated.
Individuals selecting a primary care provider that
coordinates their care.
Delivering behavioral health care and primary care
services within a single system of care so that
providers in each domain - behavioral health and
primary care - communicate and work together in
models that integrate and/or coordinate care in the
patient's interest.
Supporting dedicated entities (e.g., medical groups,
behavioral health providers, clinics, hospitals, and/or
community based organizations) that coordinate care
for people with multiple chronic conditions and other
complex, high need populations.
87Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
September Statements
Expanding and building upon models, such as
integrated delivery systems, with demonstrated
success in integrating and coordinating care for a
patient population.
Standard measures of care quality, health
outcomes and other outcomes of interest (e.g.,
timely access, consumer experience, social risk)
for individuals and populations should be
measured and publicly reported.
Accountability for population health outcomes
should be established so that when outcomes do
not meet expectations, corrective action can be
taken.
Unified data systems and health information
technology that allow analysis of patient data (by
characteristics such as race/ethnicity, gender,
sexual orientation and gender identity, disability,
age, and income), cost, quality, and health
outcomes are necessary tools for accountability.
The health care system should ensure that care
delivery is centered on patient needs rather than
excessive profit motives.
Enrolling or assigning individuals into models with
demonstrated success in integrating and
coordinating care for a patient population would
facilitate accountability for cost, quality and
outcomes.
Continue the shift from fee-for-service (FFS)
payments, which pay providers for the volume of
services delivered, to value-based payments,
which hold providers accountable for cost, quality,
and outcomes.
November Statements
Expanding and building upon models, such as Kaiser
and PACE, with demonstrated success in integrating
and coordinating care across the continuum for a
defined patient population.
Standard measures of care quality, health outcomes
and other outcomes of interest (e.g., timely access,
quality of consumer experience, social risk) for
individuals and populations should be measured and
publicly reported. Detailed demographic data should
be collected and used to analyze disparities and
identify ways in which more equitable outcomes can
be advanced.
Accountability for population health outcomes should
be established so that when outcomes do not meet
expectations, the Unified Financing Authority can
take corrective action, including imposition of
penalties or other enforcement actions.
Unified data systems that assure patient privacy but
allow analysis of patient data (by characteristics such
as race/ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation and
gender identity, disability, age, and income), cost,
quality, and health outcomes are necessary tools for
accountability.
The health care system should ensure that care
delivery is centered on patient needs rather than
excessive profit motives.
Encouraging individuals to enroll into models with
demonstrated success in integrating and
coordinating care for a patient population would
facilitate accountability for cost, quality and
outcomes. Patients should have a periodic
opportunity (e.g., annually) to select a different care
arrangement.
Continue the shift from fee-for-service (FFS)
payments, which pay providers for the volume of
services delivered, to alternative payment models in
which providers are held accountable for cost,
quality, and outcomes across the populations they
serve.
Added: Ensure providers caring for populations with
greater social risk factors succeed in alternative
payment models by adjusting payment, including
upfront supplemental payments or incentive
payments that provide higher reimbursement.
88Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
September Statements
Adequately support primary care and encourage
greater use of primary care vs specialty services.
Employ risk-based capitation payments to assign
accountability for cost, quality and outcomes.
Assure care is well-coordinated, particularly for
people with complex chronic conditions and/or
behavioral health care needs.
Encourage involvement of diverse levels and types
of professionals and caregivers (e.g., nurses, other
health care professionals, community health care
workers).
Encourage the use of community health centers
with expertise in delivering care to diverse and
underserved populations.
Encourage the equitable distribution of health care
providers across California's regions and diverse
populations.
Racial equity should be centered throughout every
aspect of health care financing arrangements and
the health care delivery system.
To achieve equitable care, differences in financial
resources and social supports among individuals
and between California communities should be
addressed, including adjusting provider payment
by a region's status as an underserved area or by
providing targeted resources and supports that are
not dependent on provider reimbursements.
November Statements
Provide increased support for primary care and
improve access to primary care services.
Provide hospitals, medical groups and health plans
the flexibility to use resources to maximize the health
of the populations they serve, rather than being tied
to fee-for-service payment methods. One example of
such flexibility would be to establish global budgets
for hospitals, linked to community health and health
equity measures. Another example might deploy risk-
adjusted capitation payments to assign accountability
for access, cost, quality and health outcomes while
taking into consideration population size and provider
financial solvency.
Assure care is well-coordinated, particularly for
people with complex chronic conditions and/or
behavioral health care needs.
Encourage the use of the non-physician health care
workforce (e.g., nurses, other health care
professionals, navigators, community health care
workers) in situations where these roles have been
demonstrated to improve access to care, address
social determinants of health, reduce health
disparities, and/or support effective patient
engagement.
Encourage the use of community health centers with
expertise in delivering care to diverse and
underserved populations.
Encourage the equitable distribution of health care
providers and expertise across California's regions
and diverse populations.
Racial equity should be centered throughout every
aspect of health care financing arrangements and the
health care delivery system.
To achieve equitable care, differences in financial
resources and social supports among individuals and
between California communities should be
addressed, including adjusting provider payment by a
region's status as an underserved area or by
providing targeted resources and supports that are
not dependent on provider reimbursements.
89Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
September Statements
-
To achieve equitable care, the needs of other
populations that have been marginalized – e.g.,
racial and ethnic minorities, the aged, people with
disabilities, LGBTQ+, and people with limited
English proficiency - should be elevated.
The health care system should invest in a
workforce that is diverse and responsive to
consumer and patient needs, including addressing
the current gaps in access to physicians and other
allied health care workers and ensuring California's
future workforce needs.
A system of governance that is responsive to the
priorities of Californians and incorporates
consumer voices, including voice of marginalized
populations in priority-setting, should be
established.
A fundamental imbalance between high spending
on medical treatment versus underinvestment in
prevention should be addressed through increased
investment targeting the social determinants of
health.
Because population health outcomes are
influenced by forces outside the four walls of
medical care settings, the health care system
should tightly align with state and local public
health departments to support community based
prevention activities.
November Statements
To achieve equitable care, the needs of populations
that have been marginalized – e.g., racial and ethnic
minorities, immigrants, the aged, people with
disabilities, LGBTQ+, and people with limited English
proficiency - should be addressed with the goal of
eliminating disparities in access and outcomes.
The health care system should invest in a workforce
that is diverse, that can meet the cultural,
socioeconomic, and linguistic diversity of California's
residents and that is responsive to consumer and
patient needs. The Unified Financing Authority
should work in partnership with others in the public
and private sector to address gaps in access to
physicians and other allied health care workers and
to ensure California's future workforce needs.
A system of governance and accountability that is
responsive to the priorities of Californians and
incorporates consumer voices, including voices of
marginalized populations in priority-setting, should be
established. This includes regularly soliciting
meaningful, authentic community input regarding
planned changes and establishing mechanisms to
report back to communities.
Added: Independent regional councils comprised of
and governed by multiple sector and community
stakeholders who work together to address the root
causes of inequities should be established.
Added: The governance of existing health
organizations should be strengthened by including
more members of the community in positions that
have power.
A fundamental imbalance between high spending on
medical treatment versus underinvestment in
prevention should be addressed through increased
investment in health screening, early diagnosis and
disease prevention.
Because population health outcomes are influenced
by forces outside the four walls of medical care
settings, the health care system should tightly align
with state and local public health departments to
support community based prevention activities. The
health care system should also connect to the social
safety net to address issues such as food insecurity
and housing instability.
90Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
September Statements
Obtaining federal approval to reinvest federal
funding for public insurance programs (Medicare,
Medicaid and Affordable Care Act marketplace tax
credits and subsidies) in support of a state-based
unified financing system.
Developing and managing sources of financing in
ways that assure California upholds its long-term
commitments.
Managing health care costs in line with a target
annual rate of growth to ensure that California can
continue to afford its health care system.
Establishing reserves to ensure sustainability when
costs exceed revenue, such as during economic
downturns.
November Statements
Added: Complementary investments (likely from
outside the health care delivery system) in the social
determinants of health, including but not limited to
safe and affordable housing, equitable, high-quality
education, and affordable and accessible early child
care would improve health outcomes.
Obtaining federal approval to integrate federal
funding for public insurance programs (Medicare,
Medicaid and Affordable Care Act marketplace tax
credits and subsidies) with state-based funding
sources is critical in supporting a state-based unified
financing system.
Sources of financing, including federal contributions,
should be developed and managed in ways that
assure California upholds its long-term commitments.
Health care costs should be managed in line with a
target annual rate of growth benchmarked to
measures such as state gross domestic product in
order to ensure that California can continue to afford
its health care system.
Diverse sources of financing and reserves to ensure
sustainability when costs exceed revenue, such as
during economic downturns, should be established.
91Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Appendix B: Why Do Estimates of California Health Expenditures Vary?
Over the years, many analysts have examined how health expenditures would change
under national or state-specific unified financing policies, including single payer proposals.
In addition to the analysis included in this report, other California specific-analyses in recent
years have been conducted by the University of Massachusetts Amherst Political Economy
Research Institute, or PERI (2017), 7⁹ the California Legislative Analyst's Office, or LAO
(2018), 80 and the California Health Benefits Review Program, or CHBRP (2021).81 The
depth of analysis conducted varied between estimates.
79
Analyses of how health expenditures would change under unified financing generally start
with an analysis of total health expenditures under the current system. Even these baseline
estimates are subject to significant variation and uncertainty because there is no
single recent data source for total health expenditures in California. The Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Services provides health expenditures data by state of residence
but the most recent data available is for 2014 and state-level data is not available for
administrative, public health, and investment expenditures.
When comparing estimates of total California health expenditures, estimates must reflect
the same time period to be accurately compared. In inflating or deflating an estimate to a
particular year for purposes of comparison it is important to use an inflation factor that is
specific to health care, such as CMS projections of national health expenditures growth,
rather than a general inflator like CPI because health care expenditures have generally
grown faster than other economic indicators. For example, CMS projected that total health
expenditures would be 29.2 percent higher in 2022 than in 2017, while CPI would be 12.8
percent higher.82
Another source of variation in estimates is the categories of health spending
included in total health expenditures. The estimates in this report include all types of
health expenditures included by CMS in their national health expenditures estimates
including personal health care, government administration and net cost of health insurance,
public health, and investment, while estimates from PERI and LAO exclude investment,
which we estimate to equal approximately $28.8 billion in 2022. The CHBRP 2021 analysis
only included personal health care expenditures.
The estimates of total baseline California health expenditures from the HCFA Consulting
Team, PERI, and LAO are in a similar range when adjusted to 2022 using projected
7⁹ Robert Pollin, James Heintz, Peter Arno, Jeannette Wicks-Lim, Economic Analysis of the Healthy California
Single-Payer Health Care Proposal (SB-562), University of Massachusetts Amherst Political Economy
Research Institute, May 31, 2017
80 California Legislative Analyst's Office, Financing Considerations for Potential State Healthcare Policy
Challenges, Presented to Assembly Select Committee on Health Care Delivery Systems and Universal
Coverage, February 5, 2018
81 California Health Benefits Review Program, California Assembly Bill 1400: Guaranteed Health Care for All,
Summary to the 2021-2022 California State Legislature, April 22, 2021,
82 Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, National Health Expenditure Data
92Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
National Health Expenditures growth. The estimates from CHBRP are not shown below as
they are significantly lower due to the exclusion of administrative, public health, and
investment expenditures and the use of CPI to inflate expenditures in the lower bound
scenario.
Estimated Total California Health Expenditures under Baseline from Select Recent Analyses
As published reflecting various
years
Source
Estimate adjusted to 2022 using
CMS National Health
Expenditures growth projections
$517 billion
HCFA
Consulting
Team (2022)
$517 (2022)
LAO (2018)
$400 (2017-2018)
$497 billion 83
PERI (2017)
$369 (2017)
$478 billion
Note: LAO and PERI estimates exclude investment which is approximately $28 billion in 2022.
Estimates of health expenditures under unified financing are affected by the specific
policy design analyzed and how features of unified financing are assumed to impact
health expenditures. Specific assumptions about the policy design of a unified financing
system, such as how providers would be paid, whether individuals would pay any cost
sharing, which benefits would be covered, etc. affect the estimates of how health
expenditures would change. Analysts' assumptions about the impact that those policy
design features and other features inherent to unified financing, such as universal coverage
and administrative simplification, also vary.
Given the range of ways in which analyses vary, it is generally most accurate to compare
estimates of current expenditures against projected expenditures under unified financing
from the same source. The HCFA Consulting team estimated a range of changes in total
health expenditures in year 1 from a decrease of 7 percent to an increase of 2 percent
depending on the scenario (Table 1), with higher levels of savings achieved over time. PERI
estimated that total health expenditures would decline by 10 percent in year 1 under the
single payer proposal analyzed. The LAO estimated that the amount needed to run a
publicly financed health care program would be similar to expenditures under our current
system. These estimates are all within the range of the projected change in expenditures
estimated in national analyses or analyses in other states.
84
83
The LAO estimate for 2017-2018 was inflated using the average of the projected growth rates from 2017 to
2022 and 2018 to 2022.
84 According to one study that reviewed a range of analyses of single payer proposals in the U.S. or specific
states, most past analyses of unified financing have concluded that some savings would be achieved relative
to our current system, from slight savings to savings of approximately 15 percent in the first year. Christopher
Cai et al, Projected costs of single-payer health care financing in the United States: A systematic review of
economic analyses, PLOS Medicine, January 15, 2020
93Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Appendix C: Legal Memo on Unified Financing of State Health Coverage
MEMORANDUM
To:
From:
Ben McGowan
Jared Goldman
John Puente
Caroline Brown
Phil Peisch
Julia Seidenberg
Date: January 6, 2022
Subject: Unified Financing of State Health Coverage
You have asked us whether there is existing federal authority that would allow California to
consolidate federal funding from multiple sources to support the State's implementation of health
care delivery through a unified financing system. As we understand it, the State's interest is in
consolidating federal payments that currently flow through distinct health care programs overseen
by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) in order to make available to
Californians a comprehensive package of health care services and coverage arrangements that do not
vary by age, employment, income, disability status, or other characteristics.
As we explain below, there is no single authority that would allow HHS to redirect federal
funds for the three principal programs it oversees, i.e., Medicare, Medicaid (Medi-Cal), and advance
premium tax credits under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Instead, each funding stream is subject to
different authorities that permit HHS to waive certain federal requirements and limitations, as
summarized in the attached Appendix.
We address each program in turn, and the extent to which these existing waiver authorities
could be used to facilitate a unified financing system by re-directing funds to the State, which would
then be responsible for the provision of benefits to the covered populations. We conclude that there
are relatively straightforward paths with respect to Medicaid and the ACA-covered population,
complicated only by the size and diversity of California's population. Medicare is much more
challenging. Although we have identified authorities that would potentially allow for redirection of
funding, exercise of that authority would be unprecedented and politically charged. Even assuming
that the consolidated funding is possible, the issue of different benefit packages for different
populations might remain, as we question whether HHS would exercise its waiver authority to
eliminate or reduce benefits to which beneficiaries are entitled by statute.
94Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
I. Redirecting Federal Funds
Existing federal waiver authority provides HHS with the ability to approve deviation from
federally required standards and limitations in Medicare, Medicaid, and the individual and small
group insurance markets (or “exchanges") created by the ACA. The extent to which these waiver
authorities could be used to alter program financing structures varies, and the State's success in
seeking federal approval of such waivers will depend on the current administration's interpretation
of the authorities, as well as its willingness and interest in supporting state-based unified financing
reform.
a. ACA Exchanges
Section 1332 of the ACA allows HHS to approve alternatives to some of the federal
requirements governing ACA exchanges. See Appendix (listing statutory requirements waivable
under Section 1332). If a Section 1332 waiver program reduces the amount of premium tax credit or
small business health care tax credit that individuals and employers in the State would otherwise
receive, HHS will pay the federal savings to the State as "pass-through funding." Thus, if the State
operates a health care program that covers the population that would otherwise be eligible for
advance premium tax credits (individuals with family income up to 400% of the federal poverty
level, including nonqualified aliens not otherwise eligible for federal health programs), the State
could receive a payment equal to the tax credits and cost-sharing subsidies that the federal
government would otherwise spend on that population.
States seeking approval of a 1332 waiver must satisfy four "guardrails" or conditions specified
in the statute: (1) coverage must be at least as comprehensive as the ACA exchanges, (2) coverage
and cost sharing protecting against excessive out-of-pocket spending must be as affordable as the
ACA exchanges, (3) coverage must be provided to a comparable number of residents as the ACA
exchanges, and (4) the waiver cannot increase the federal deficit. § 1332(b).
b. Medicaid
Sections 1903 and 1905 of the Social Security Act (SSA) dictate the financing of Medicaid
through a shared federal-state matching formula under which HHS matches the State’s expenditures
to providers serving Medi-Cal beneficiaries. Section 1115 of the SSA allows HHS to approve
substantial modifications to the Medicaid program's delivery, coverage and payment of services.
However, Section 1115 does not provide HHS with the authority to waive either Section 1903 or
Section 1905, because Secretary's 1115 waiver authority extends only to “compliance with any of the
requirements of section... 1902." (While Section 1115(a)(2) also gives the Secretary authority to
provide federal financial participation in costs which are not otherwise included as program
expenditures, CMS has not construed that authority as allowing it to depart from the basic principle
that it can only match state expenditures under the statutory formula).
While Section 1115 does not allow HHS to alter the standard Medicaid funding structure, it
can potentially be used to support a state-based comprehensive health care delivery system in which
the State establishes itself as the single Medicaid managed care organization (MCO). Under this
scenario, Medi-Cal would pay a capitated amount to the State-based MCO, which is then at-risk for
paying providers for services furnished to Medi-Cal beneficiaries.
Vermont has used this approach for many years. Under its 1115 waiver, the Department of
Vermont Health Access (DVHA), a department within the State Medicaid agency (SMA), operates a
single, statewide Medicaid MCO and receives monthly capitation payments from the SMA. The
waiver authorizes the State to use any savings from the capitation payments to DVHA to fund non-
Medicaid health programs. In exchange for the significant flexibility to use federal Medicaid funds to
95Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
finance State health programs, Vermont agreed to operate under a global cap on the federal
matching funds for all Medicaid services. Vermont's waiver, called the Global Commitment to Health
Demonstration, has evolved since it was first implemented in 2005, but CMS has continued to
approve the waiver's basic structure, wherein the State operates as the single Medicaid MCO, and is
allowed to invest savings in non-Medicaid health programs.
c. Medicare
Conventionally, the State does not have a role in the financing or provision of Medicare
benefits. Instead, the Secretary pays providers for services furnished to beneficiaries with funds
drawn from the Hospital Insurance Trust Fund (Part A), the Supplementary
Medical Insurance Trust Fund (for Part B), or both (for Medicare Advantage, Part C). Part D
(prescription drugs) is funded through general revenues and beneficiary premiums.
Section 1115A of the SSA allows HHS to approve broad waivers of Medicare as necessary to
test "innovative payment and service delivery models to reduce program expenditures while
preserving or enhancing the quality of care." This authority is exercised by the Center for Medicare &
Medicaid Innovation (CMMI) and was created by the ACA.
Payment and service delivery models tested under 1115A are typically developed by CMMI,
which then solicits applications. However, Maryland and Vermont have successfully sought approval
for models that were not developed by CMMI, and we have not identified any authority or guidance
that limits CMMI's ability to select models proposed from outside stakeholders, including States.
Section 1115A lists 27 different payment and service delivery models for CMMI to consider
testing. § 1115A(b). While unified financing is not included in the described models, the statutory
language ("...may include, but not limited to...”) does not limit CMMI to the models listed. CMMI has
confirmed this reading, stating that “although section 1115A(b) of the [SSA] describes a number of
payment and service delivery models that the Secretary may choose to test, the Secretary is not
limited to those models." 80 Fed. Reg. 73273, 73278 (Nov. 24, 2015). Models directed at state-based
innovation is clearly contemplated by the statute, which includes in its list of models "allowing States
to test and evaluate fully integrated care for dual eligible individuals in the State, including the
management and oversight of all funds under applicable titles with respect to such individuals,” and
"allowing States to test and evaluate systems of all-payer payment reform for the medical care of
residents of the State, including dual eligible individuals.” § 1115A(b)(2)(B)(xi), (xii).
Section 1115A's authority with respect to Medicare is broad. The statute expands on existing
and longstanding Medicare waiver authority at Section 402(b) of the 1967 SSA amendments, and
Section 222(a) of the 1972 SSA amendments. These authorities are limited to waiving Title XVIII
(Medicare statutory provisions) only "insofar as such requirements relate to reimbursement or
payment on the basis of reasonable cost, or on the basis of reasonable charge, or to reimbursement
or payment only for such services or item as may be specified in the experiment...” § 402(b), or
"insofar as such requirements relate to methods of payment for services provided...” § 222(a). In
comparison, Section 1115A broadly allows CMMI to waive any provision of Title XVIII “as may be
necessary solely for purposes of carrying out this section with respect to testing models..." SSA §
1115A(d)(1). The statute further supports the breadth of CMMI's authority under 1115A by limiting
administrative and judicial review of many decisions made by CMMI. See § 1115A(d)(2).
In selecting models for testing, CMMI must determine "that there is evidence that the model
addresses a defined population for which there are deficits in care leading to poor clinical outcomes
or potentially avoidable expenditures.” § 1115A(b)(2). If CMMI determines that a model is not
expected to improve the quality of care and/or reduce spending (without reducing quality), CMMI
must terminate or modify the model. § 1115A(b)(3)(B). Finally, though 1115A itself does not limit
96Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
CMMI's waiver authority with respect to Medicare, Section 3601 of the ACA provides that "nothing
in the provisions of, or amendments made by, [the ACA] shall result in a reduction of guaranteed
benefits under title XVIII of the [SSA]." Accordingly, CMMI could not approve a model that requires
a Medicare waiver that would reduce Medicare benefits. See 85 Fed. Reg. 61114, 61141 (Sept. 29,
2020) (requirement that model participants "continue to make medically necessary covered services
available to beneficiaries to the extent required by law" adequately safeguards against reduction of
guaranteed Medicare benefits).
Provided that the above requirements are met, we have identified three potential avenues in
which the CMMI authorities could be exercised to test models in which some level of Medicare
funding could flow through the State.
First, California could propose that CMMI use its authority to test payment and service
delivery models and broadly waive Title XVIII requirements to approve a model under which the
State would establish itself as the single Accountable Care Organization (ACO) providing coverage to
traditional Medicare beneficiaries in the State. CMMI has developed and approved a range of
Medicare ACO models already, and expanding Medicare enrollment in ACOs is among the goals
described in CMMI's recently published Strategy Refresh.85 For example, California can propose a
model that integrates elements of CMMI's existing ACO demonstrations that, if adopted with some
modification by the State acting as an ACO, could accomplish many of the flexibilities necessary to
support a unified financing system. For example, CMMI's Next Generation ACO Model features
almost complete financial risk sharing, shared savings based on prospectively set benchmarks, and
the option to be paid using an all-inclusive population-based payment mechanism. Mandatory
provider participation in the state-based ACO would further ensure comprehensive Medicare
participation in California's unified financing system. While most ACO models tested have been
voluntary, CMMI has repeatedly stated that it has the authority to require provider participation in
1115A models as a general matter. See, e.g., 85 Fed. Reg. at 61141; 80 Fed. Reg. at 73278. Mandatory
provider participation would also mean the State need not seek a waiver of Section 1802 of the SSA,
which guarantees traditional Medicare beneficiaries' freedom of choice of providers.
Second, in conjunction with or as an alternative to operating a state-based Medicare ACO,
California could propose that CMMI approve a model under which California would operate as the
single Medicare Advantage plan providing coverage to Medicare beneficiaries in the State. Under
that model, the State as the Medicare Advantage plan would receive capitated payments from HHS
and would be responsible for the coverage and provision of Medicare benefits for the plan enrollees.
If enrollment were mandatory, CMMI would have to waive Section 1851, which provides that
Medicare beneficiaries may choose to receive benefits through traditional Medicare or through
enrollment in a Medicare Advantage plan, and may choose among available Medicare Advantage
plans offered in the area where the beneficiary resides. While we have not identified any authority or
guidance that limits CMMI's ability to waive Section 1851 and require beneficiaries to enroll in a
particular Medicare Advantage plan, a proposal that limits Medicare beneficiary choice will likely
face political challenges. Historically, health care reforms seen as interfering with Medicare freedom-
of-choice have not succeeded in overcoming the political backlash that accompanies the perceived
threat of losing access to Medicare entitlements. Accordingly, while Section 1115A provides the legal
authority for CMMI to approve a model that limits Medicare beneficiary freedom of choice, it is
unclear if such a proposal is politically feasible.
Third, we have considered whether CMMI would have authority under Section 1115A to test
and approve a model under which Medicare funds are provided to the State outright in exchange for
85 CMMI, Innovation Center Strategy Refresh at 16 (Oct. 20, 2021), https://innovation.cms.gov/strategic-
direction-whitepaper.
97Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
the State's agreement to manage the program in California on HHS’s behalf. We have not identified
a discrete statutory or regulatory provision dictating how HHS must direct Medicare funds.
Accordingly, even though the Secretary's waiver authority under Section 1115A is very broad, it is not
clear what Title XVIII requirement could be waived by CMMI to implement a model where Medicare
funds are redirected to the State.
That said, it is possible that CMMI would conclude that the authority for such a model is
inherent in its mandate. The integration model for dual eligibles which is listed as a potential model
in the statute specifically includes “the management and oversight of all funds under the applicable
titles with respect to such individuals" by the State. § 1115A(b)(2)(B)(x). If CMMI can approve such a
model with respect to dual eligibles, it may conclude that it also has the authority to approve such a
model for all Medicare beneficiaries in a State. CMMI has previously taken a broad view of its
authority. For example, in response to previous criticisms of 1115A models in which provider
participation is mandatory, CMMI has noted that it does not rely on a specific provision in Section
1115A, but instead relies "on section 1115A of the [SSA] as a whole, as well as the Secretary's existing
authority to carry out her duties and administer the Medicare program.” 80 Fed. Reg. at 73278; see
also, 85 Fed. Reg. at 61141 (“The statute does not require that models be voluntary, but rather gives
the Secretary broad discretion to design and test models that meet certain requirements as to
spending and quality."). "Specifically, the Secretary has authority under sections 1102 and 1871 of the
[SSA] to implement regulations as necessary to administer Medicare, including testing this Medicare
payment and service delivery model." Id.
Whether the State can successfully pursue any of the above proposed 1115A models will
depend in significant part on CMMI and the current administration's interest in supporting a state-
based unified financing system. For example, previous statements made by HHS political appointees
and CMMI refusing to redirect Medicare funds to States or rejecting state-based single payer reforms
suggested an unwillingness to approve such a model, rather than the belief that HHS lacks the
authority to do so. CMMI, State Innovation Models Funding Opportunity Announcement at 13
(Aug. 13, 2012), https://innovation.cms.gov/files/x/stateinnovation_foa.pdf (“CMS will not compel
providers in any Model testing state to participate in new payment and service delivery models, nor
will CMS cede Medicare payment authority to the state."); Seema Verma, Remarks at the
Commonwealth Club of California at 50:00 (July 25, 2018),
https://www.commonwealthclub.org/events/archive/video/medicare-and-medicaid-administrator-
seema-verma (suggesting that a waiver redirecting federal funds to a state-based single payer system
would not be approved because it is not "fiscally sustainable").
Proposing New Federal Statutory Authority
II.
As described above, pursuing a unified financing model would require stitching together
various authorities, each of which have their own requirements for approval and most of which shift
substantial risk to the State.
Amending existing statutory waiver authority could allow California to better pursue unified
financing. Adding Sections 1903 and 1905 of the SSA to the Medicaid provisions that can be waived
under either Section 1115 or 1115A would enable HHS to convert the conventional Medicaid
financing stream into an alternative.
Amending the list of models described in Section 1115A to include unified financing would
clarify that CMMI has the authority to redirect Medicare funds to the State as part of a payment and
service delivery model.
Enacting a new waiver authority to allow States to use federal funding from existing health
care programs, including Medicare, Medicaid and the ACA exchanges, to implement comprehensive
98Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
health care coverage would allow California to pursue full unified financing. As an example,
proposed legislation such as H.R. 3775, the State-Based Universal Health Care Act, would provide
the necessary authority for HHS to direct federal funds to California as a lump sum.
Please let us know if you have any questions regarding the above.
99Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Waiver Authority
SSA § 1115: Medicaid
Demonstration Waiver
SSA Amdts of 1967 § 402(b)
(42 USC § 1395b-1)
Legal Appendix
SSA § 1115A: CMMI Waiver
Statutory requirements
waived
SSA § 1902
Titles XVIII and XIX "insofar
as such requirements relate
to reimbursement or
payment on the basis of
reasonable cost, or ... on the
basis of reasonable charge, or
to reimbursement or
payment only for such
services or item as may be
specified in the
experiment..."
SSA Amdmts of 1972 § 222(a) Titles XVIII and XIX sof
(42 USC 1395b-1 note)
as such requirements relate
to methods of payment for
services provided..."
Titles XI and XVIII
SSA §§ 1902(a)(1),
1902(a)(13),
1903(m)(2)(A)(iii), 1934
(other than subsections
(b)(1)(A) and (c)(5))
100
Notes
This authority is frequently used to
expand coverage, modify delivery
systems, and restructure financing
and other program elements. CMS
has approved waivers across a
number of different program areas
to provide states with flexibility in
administering their Medicaid
programs.
| This authority was most commonly
used for Medicare demonstrations
prior to the ACA. HHS would
develop its own demonstration
proposal and then solicit
participants.
Many Medicare payment system
changes and alternative delivery
approaches adopted by Congress
originated as Section 402
demonstrations.
Projects involving waivers of both
Medicare and Medicaid
requirements have been approved,
and State Medicaid agencies have
implemented demonstrations
created under this authority.
This authority allows for Medicare
demonstrations that test
alternative prospective payment
methodologies. This authority has
commonly been used in
conjunction with Section 402
waiver authority for
demonstrations involving
prospective payment.
CMMI usually implements Section
1115A by developing its own
delivery system and payment
reform models and then soliciting
applications.
Both Maryland and Vermont have
successfully secured approval for a
CMMI model that was not
developed by CMMI.
The suggested payment models
listed in the statute expressly
provides for dualsKey Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Waiver Authority
ACA § 1332 (42 USC §
18052): Innovation Waiver
Statutory requirements
waived
sharing for individuals
enrolled in QHPs)
26 USC §§ 36B, 4980H, and
5000A (IRC)
Notes
42 USC §§ 18021-18024
(establishment of QHPs)
42 USC §§ 18031-18033
(consumer choices and
insurance competition
through health benefit
exchanges)
Thus far demonstrations focused
on duals have been pretty narrow.
This authority has most often been
used to fund state-based
reinsurance programs for the
individual insurance market. The
Trump administration approved
the first broad waiver under this
authority to restructure Georgia's
42 USC § 18071 (reduced cost individual market, however the
Biden administration has taken
actions to further evaluate
Georgia's waiver and may reopen
approval of the waiver.
101
Unified financing is not included in
the suggested models, however the
plain language of the statute (“...
may include, but are not limited
to...") clearly provide that the
CMMI is not limited to those
models listed.Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Other Authorities
SSA § 1899: Medicare Shared Savings Program
SSA § 1851 et seq.: Medicare Advantage
SSA § 1874A: Medicare Administrative
Contracting
Notes
Allows HHS to approve Medicare shared
savings programs and accountable care
organizations in Part A and Part B.
Optional alternative to the original Medicare
fee-for-service program through Part A and
Part B provides coverage through private
managed care plans under contract with CMS.
Allows HHS to contract out Medicare
administrative functions, including payment
determinations and provider reimbursement.
102Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Appendix D: Employment Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)
Considerations for Unified Financing 86
Background on ERISA87
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), passed in 1974, provides minimum
standards that employers must meet when providing pension and certain health benefits as
part of employee compensation packages.
Importantly, ERISA does not require that employers provide a specific set of benefits, or any
benefits at all. If employers do provide health and pension benefits, those benefits must
comply with ERISA in a number of ways, including information disclosures, accessibility,
portability, and more.
●
●
ERISA has been amended several times. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA) and the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996, for instance, are both examples of amendments to ERISA that
expanded minimum standards for employer benefits.
Several cases exempt group health plans from ERISA. These include:
O
Employer is a church/religious organization
O
Employer is a government or governmental agency
Group health plan is considered voluntary, and employer does not provide any
contributions
ERISA also covers other types of employer-covered plans (dental, vision, life insurance,
disability, HRA, etc.)
The ERISA-Unified Financing Conflict 88
When employers offer health benefits, they may choose either to outsource their group
health plan to a third-party health insurer, OR self-fund their employees' health care costs
directly. This latter option is sometimes called an Administrative Services Only (ASO)
contract.
O
Self-funding allows companies to control their expenditures and monitor employees'
health care costs; however, it also requires companies to shoulder employees' health
risks directly.
"Very large employers are most likely to self-fund because their size better positions
them to forecast and spread risk, and because it allows them to offer uniform benefits
to their employees nationwide, avoiding both state benefit mandates and state-
imposed insurance taxes."
"89
"At least 5.5 million Californians are covered through self-funded employer
arrangements."
"90
Unified financing proposals, depending on how they are designed, have the potential
to conflict with ERISA's self-funded health plan option. ERISA preempts "any and all
86 This summary on ERISA Considerations for Unified Financing was drafted by David Toppelberg of the
California Health and Human Services Agency.
87 https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/health-plans/erisa
88 This section is largely sourced from "An Environmental Analysis of Health Care Delivery, Coverage, and
Financing in California" report produced for the Healthy California for All Commission. In particular, this section
is sourced from pages 79-82 (footnotes 193-205).
89 lbid.
90 lbid.
103Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
State laws insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any employee benefit plan.”⁹¹ In
other words, self-funded ERISA plans are exempt from state health insurance regulation, and
thus cannot be prohibited by any State. Preemption doctrine generally displaces state law in
favor of federal law. If, for example, a state enacted a law requiring all employer sponsored
health plans to offer a specified set of benefits and use a specific copayment structure, the
provisions of that law would almost certainly be preempted by ERISA, and the state would
not be able to require employers that had established plans governed by ERISA to comply
with the provisions of that law.
While the ultimate decision on whether ERISA conflicts with a particular single-payer
construct will likely have to be settled in the courts, these legal-regulatory hurdles complicate
any unified financing proposal at the state level.
Reconciling ERISA and Single-Payer ⁹2
Congress wrote ERISA's provisions such that the law preempts “any and all” state laws that
"relate to" any benefit plan covered by the Act; this has been described as one of the most
expansive preemption provisions in any federal statute, especially because of the "relate to"
aspect of the preemption provision.⁹3
●
A crucial aspect of making any unified financing or single-payer proposal
economically and politically feasible is for employers to forego offering employer-
sponsored coverage and instead, directly or indirectly, support a unified financing
plan.
With over sixty single-payer bills introduced in 21 state legislatures during 2010-19,
legislators have generally pursued three distinct models intended to avoid having ERISA
preemption override state health reforms:
1. Funding plans that use payroll taxes, income taxes, or both to raise revenue to pay
for the single payer plan. Because employers/employees would be contributing to the
single payer program and paying for employer coverage, this approach incentivizes
employers/employees to switch only to the single payer program and drop employer
coverage entirely, or, perhaps, retain it only for supplemental coverage.
Provider regulations that restrict participating providers from billing any third party
other than the unified financing program.
2.
3.
Assignment/subrogation/secondary-payer provisions that allow the single payer
program to pay for services and then seek reimbursement from patients' employer-
based health plans.
Because no unified financing plan has passed into law (other than Vermont's abandoned
plan), these three models have not been tested in court. There is great judicial uncertainty in
regard to the three aforementioned models in bypassing ERISA's preemption, especially
because the courts have taken a rather "tortured" reading of the statutes that do not conform
with the original Congressional intent. ⁹4
Unlike most major federal health care statutes such as Medicare, Medicaid, and the ACA,
ERISA does not contain any waiver provisions to allow state-level health reform
experimentation.
91 ERISA, Section 514(a), 29 U.S.C., Section 1144(a). Manatt Health, Understanding the Rules: Federal Legal
Considerations for State-Based Approaches to Expand Coverage in California, California Health Care
Foundation, February 2018
92 This section's proposals are sourced from the following unless otherwise footnoted: Fuse Brown, E. C., &
McCuskey, E. Y. (2019). Federalism, ERISA, and State Single-Payer Health Care. U. Pa. L. Rev., 168, 389.
93 lbid.
94 Ibid.
104Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
If the three models above do not bypass ERISA preemption, Brown and McCuskey suggest
four possible solutions to clear the way for state-level unified financing (three legislative
and one jurisprudential), as described below:
1. Congressional amendment replacing the "any and all" preemption with floor
preemption used in other comparable health statutes.
2.
3.
Congressional amendment eliminating ERISA's "deemer clause", thereby clearing the
barriers around interference with self-funded employer-based plans under ERISA.
Congressional amendment adding a statutory waiver provision to ERISA. This would
allow the federal government to manage degrees of uniformity and permit state
experimentation to health policy.
4. New jurisprudential interpretations that curtail the courts' vision of ERISA's
preemption. The authors admit this pathway is most unlikely.
If neither Congress nor the courts will act to reform ERISA's preemption provisions, the
authors recommend that state legislators use overlapping, hybrid models for single-payer
that combine the three approaches (economic incentives, provider regulations,
assignment/subrogation/secondary-payer) to maximize the possibility of skirting around
ERISA preemption.
WA
OR
NV
AK
Exhibit 1: Single Payer Bills in State Legislatures ⁹5
Single-Payer Bills in State Legislatures
(2010-2019)
ID
AZ
UT
MT
WY
со
NM
HI
ND
SD
NE
KS
TX
OK
MN
IA
MO
AR
LA
WI
MI
IL IN
MS
TN
KY
AL
OH
GA
WV
PA
SC
VA
NC
FL
NY
VT
NH
CT
ME
- NJ
DE
MD
DC
RI
Single Payer Legislation
Introduced
Single-Payer Legislation
Passed
95 "Could States Do Single-Payer Health Care?", Health Affairs Blog, July 22, 2019. Note: this article is a more
accessible, less technical version of the previous article cited by the same authors.
105Key Design Considerations for a Unified Health Care Financing System in California, Final Report, April 2022
Appendix E: Commissioner Comment Letters (forthcoming)
106